AIConfigurator: Lightning-Fast Configuration Optimization for Multi-Framework
LLM Serving
Tianhao Xu
Yi Shen

arXiv:2601.06288v1 [cs.LG] 9 Jan 2026

Yuanzhe Li

Yiming Liu
Qin Zhou

Xianglong Lu

Xumeng Chen

Xue Huang

Wenpeng Wu

Yijia Zhao

Ilya Sherstyuk

Xuting Zhou
Haorui Li

Anish Shanbhag

Aichen Feng

Rishi Thakkar

Harry Kim

Yiyi Chen
Ben Hamm

Chuan Chen

Junjie Lai

NVIDIA
Abstract
Optimizing Large Language Model (LLM) inference in production systems is increasingly difficult due to dynamic workloads, stringent latency/throughput targets, and a rapidly expanding configuration space. This complexity spans not only
distributed parallelism strategies (tensor/pipeline/expert) but
also intricate framework-specific runtime parameters such
as those concerning the enablement of CUDA graphs, available KV-cache memory fractions, and maximum token capacity, which drastically impact performance. The diversity
of modern inference frameworks (e.g., TRT-LLM, vLLM,
SGLang), each employing distinct kernels and execution policies, makes manual tuning both framework-specific and computationally prohibitive. We present AIConfigurator, a unified
performance-modeling system that enables rapid, frameworkagnostic inference configuration search without requiring
GPU-based profiling. AIConfigurator combines (1) a methodology that decomposes inference into analytically modelable
primitives—GEMM, attention, communication, and memory
operations while capturing framework-specific scheduling
dynamics; (2) a calibrated kernel-level performance database
for these primitives across a wide range of hardware platforms and popular open-weights models (GPT-OSS, Qwen,
DeepSeek, LLama, Mistral); and (3) an abstraction layer that
automatically resolves optimal launch parameters for the target backend, seamlessly integrating into production-grade
orchestration systems. Evaluation on production LLM serving workloads demonstrates that AIConfigurator identifies
superior serving configurations that improve performance by
up to 40% for dense models (e.g., Qwen3-32B) and 50% for
MoE architectures (e.g., DeepSeek-V3), while completing
searches within 30 seconds on average, enabling the rapid exploration of vast design spaces—from cluster topology down
to engine specific flags.

1

Introduction

The rapid evolution of Large Language Models (LLMs) has
placed unprecedented demands on computational infrastruc-

ture. As state-of-the-art parameter counts scale from hundreds
of millions to hundreds of billions, the efficiency of inference
deployment has become a critical determinant of economic
viability. However, optimizing these deployments is fraught
with complexity. Service providers must navigate a combinatorial explosion of configuration parameters—ranging from
tensor, pipeline, and expert parallelism strategies to granular
settings for batch sizes and quantization. Traditional performance tuning, often reliant on manual benchmarking and
exhaustive testing, is increasingly untenable. With the rising
cost of modern GPUs, manual exhaustive testing becomes
prohibitively expensive. These methods require significant
engineering effort to converge on solutions that frequently
remain sub-optimal, leaving substantial performance potential
untapped.
The emergence of disaggregated serving [19, 28]—separating prefill and decode phases onto distinct compute resources—has further complicated this landscape. While disaggregation promises to optimize "Goodput" (throughput under strict latency constraints), it is not a universally superior solution; gains depend heavily on the interplay between
model architecture, hardware topology, and network bandwidth. Practitioners face a difficult trade-off: does the scheduling flexibility of disaggregation outweigh the communication
overhead for a specific workload? Furthermore, configuring
such systems to satisfy rigorous Service Level Agreements
(SLAs)—specifically Time-To-First-Token (TTFT) and TimePer-Output-Token (TPOT)—creates a design space that can
easily exceed 10,000 permutations.
Beyond architectural decisions, the complexity is further
compounded by the intricacies of the inference engines themselves. Modern frameworks such as TensorRT-LLM [2],
vLLM [13], and SGLang [27] expose a myriad of tunable
runtime flags, such as those pertaining to the enablement
of CUDA graphs, available KV-cache memory fractions, and
maximum token capacity, that drastically impact performance.
A configuration that maximizes throughput for a specific
workload often proves brittle or inefficient as the serving
environment evolves. Consequently, developers frequently

abandon the tuning process, defaulting to conservative settings that leave significant performance potential untapped.
While black-box optimization methods such as Vizier [11]
or automated serving frameworks like Morphling [23] can
help speed up finding the optimal configs, they still require a
substantial amount of GPU hours to converge on a solution
for each specific scenario.
To address these challenges, we present AIConfigurator, a
specialized toolkit designed to optimize LLM inference across
diverse inference frameworks. Unlike generic simulators reliant on theoretical abstractions, AIConfigurator employs a
data-driven approach rooted in operation-level performance
modeling. By decomposing inference into fundamental kernels—such as GEMM computations, attention mechanisms,
and communication primitives (e.g., all-reduce, P2P)—and
utilizing interpolation of real system data, the toolkit achieves
high-fidelity estimates tailored to NVIDIA platforms (Ampere, Ada, Hopper, and Blackwell). Our contributions include:

this overhead can negate benefits for short contexts. The optimal architecture depends on workload mix (prefill-heavy vs.
decode-heavy), interconnect bandwidth, and cluster scale—
aggregated serving with chunked prefills often outperforms
disaggregation for smaller deployments. This complexity motivates AIConfigurator, which models both architectures to
identify optimal configurations.

3

Traditional heuristics like "TP within node, PP across nodes"
fail to capture non-linear interactions between compute and
network bandwidth. Studies [17, 26] show automated search
can outperform manual tuning by >2× in cost-efficiency.
Framework Heterogeneity. Production inference spans
diverse frameworks with distinct performance characteristics: vLLM [13] (PagedAttention, Python-based scheduling),
SGLang [27] (RadixAttention, Triton kernels), TensorRTLLM [2] (static graph optimization, custom kernels), and
NVIDIA Dynamo [1] (backend-agnostic orchestration). Each
exhibits unique performance cliffs governed by a myriad of
framework-specific runtime flags that generic models cannot
effectively capture.
Configuration Tuning Gap. Current approaches—nightly
benchmarks [20] and curated recipes [3]—are static lookup
tables insufficient for dynamic production environments.
AIConfigurator provides algorithmic search that identifies
SLA-compliant configurations across the multi-dimensional
space of parallelism, batch sizes, and serving architectures.

• Designing a system capable of navigating the complex
inference configuration space to identify optimal settings
in seconds with high precision.
• Demonstrating the effectiveness of the system through
seamless integration with mainstream inference frameworks—including vLLM, SGLang, TRTLLM, and
NVIDIA’s Dynamo—delivering actionable, productionready recommendations.
• Conducting a comprehensive evaluation by benchmarking against ground-truth silicon data.

2

Motivation

4

Background

Design and Implementation

LLM inference optimization involves three interdependent
pillars. Advanced scheduling—including continuous batching [24], PagedAttention [13], chunked prefills [5], and disaggregated serving [28]—maximizes hardware utilization
by addressing the distinct computational profiles of prefill
(compute-bound) and decode (memory-bound) phases. Model
parallelism distributes large models across GPUs via Tensor
Parallelism (TP) [21], Pipeline Parallelism (PP) [12], and
Expert Parallelism (EP) [16] for MoE architectures. Configuration tuning navigates the resulting combinatorial space;
while simulators like Vidur [4] and APEX [15] enable rapid
exploration, their reliance on theoretical roofline models often
diverges from production performance.

AIConfigurator employs a principled, data-driven approach to
navigate the vast LLM inference configuration space. Rather
than relying on theoretical roofline models or exhaustive
benchmarking, the system decomposes inference into fundamental operations, collects real hardware measurements
for these primitives, and composes end-to-end performance
estimates through a well-defined performance model.
The toolkit supports multiple inference frameworks
through a unified backend abstraction. Each backend
(TensorRT-LLM, SGLang, vLLM) implements frameworkspecific logic for memory estimation, aggregated serving simulation, and constraint-based optimization, while sharing the
common operation modeling infrastructure.
This section illustrates the architecture, core mechanisms,
and implementation details of AIConfigurator.

2.2

4.1

2.1

LLM Inference Optimization

Aggregated vs. Disaggregated Serving

Disaggregated serving [19, 28] separates prefill and decode
onto distinct GPU pools, enabling independent scaling but introducing KV-cache transfer overhead. Splitwise [18] shows

Workflow of AIConfigurator

Figure 1 shows Pareto curves comparing two serving modes—
aggregated and disaggregated—for a Qwen-235B model
on 64 H200 GPUs. This represents one of the key insights
2

Figure 1: AIConfigurator projected Throughput vs Speed Pareto frontiers for Qwen3-235B running on 64 H200 GPUs. All serving configurations that can achieve a TTFT (Time to First Token) ≤ 1000ms are plotted on the chart.

Figure 2: Key components of AIConfigurator and the general workflow of finding the optimal configuration.
from AIConfigurator’s simulation results. The horizontal axis
shows generation speed (tokens generated per second per
user request), while the vertical axis shows system throughput (tokens generated per second per GPU). Each point represents a serving configuration that satisfies the TTFT constraint.

tably, disaggregated serving is preferable here: its best configuration achieves 823 tokens/s/GPU, approximately 53%
higher than the best aggregated configuration (564 tokens/s/GPU) under the same speed constraint.
In summary, AIConfigurator identifies the optimal serving
configuration that maximizes system throughput while meeting specific SLA targets (e.g., TTFT < 1s, generation speed >
20 tokens/s/user).
Figure 2 describes the general workflow of utilizing AIConfigurator, which typically involves five steps, each revolving
around one of the key components of AIConfigurator:

An optimal configuration is one that achieves the highest
system throughput while meeting a target generation speed.
For example, with an input sequence length of 4096 and output length of 1024, if we require at least 20 tokens/s per user,
the starred configurations are optimal as they maximize perGPU throughput while exceeding this speed threshold. No-

• PerfDatabase: First, an offline data collection process is
3

Figure 3: Three serving modes modeled by AIConfigurator. (A) Static: GPU workers process fixed inference requests end-to-end.
(B) Aggregated: prefill and decode of different requests are mixed (continuous batching). (C) Disaggregated: separate GPU
pools for prefill and decode phases.
performed to construct a database with comprehensive
performance data for a wide range of commonly used
LLM operators across different designated hardware platforms. Each of the supported inference frameworks is
handled independently in this process.

can also directly leverage the launch file to set up an
optimally configured inference server.

4.2

Performance Modeling

Instead of directly estimating the system throughput and generation speed, AIConfigurator derives these two metrics from
the perspective of an average request arriving at the server
operating at a steady state of concurrency.

• TaskRunner: At the second step, the TaskRunner will
construct a search space comprised of all the valid candidate serving configurations based on the user provided
workload descriptor, which will include information like
user desired environment setup, SLAs and request specific characteristics.

Generation Speed = 1000/T POT
1000
T T FT + (OSL − 1) × T POT
∗ Batch Size

(1)

System Throughput =

• InferenceSession: InferenceSession will then iterate
over all the candidate serving configurations, and for
each candidate, it will estimate key performance metrics
by combining iteration-level modeling with operatorlevel performance data queried directly from the PerfDatabase.

(2)

∗ OSL
/Total Number of GPU
Both TTFT(Time to First Token) and TPOT(Time Per
Output Token) are measured in milliseconds. OSL(output
sequence length) is treated as a fixed value provided by the
user-supplied workload descriptor. As for Batch size, AIConfigurator will sweep over a range of pre-defined values when
estimating the performance for a given serving configuration.
In order to estimate TPOT and TTFT efficiently, we first
consider the full life cycle of a typical request being processed
by an inference server. In the context of LLM serving, any
given request will go through two distinct processing phases:
The prefill/context phase processes the entire user input
prompt, computing and storing the associated KV cache before producing the first output token. This phase is normally
compute intensive, and fused multi-head attention style kernels like FlashAttention [8] are usually utilized in this phase
to accelerate the attention computation. Additionally, context

• Pareto Analyzer: Afterwards, the Pareto analyzer will
filter and rank all the valid serving configurations based
on the performance projections generated in the previous stage, and output the top-ranked configurations with
comprehensive performance projections.
• Generator: Finally, AIConfigurator’s generator module can directly convert the serving recommendations identified by the Pareto analyzer into version compatible launch file for any one of the inference engines among TensorRT-LLM, vLLM and
SGLang, automatically setting the optimal serving
flags such as --enable_cuda_graph, --kv_cache_free_gpu_mem_fraction and --enable_chunked_context. Serving frameworks like NVIDIA Dynamo
4

4.2.1

chunking [5] can also be employed to split prefill of long
input prompts into multiple iteration steps.

Static Mode

In the static serving mode, as depicted in Figure 3(A), the
workload is processed in a strictly sequential manner with
a fixed batch size. In this regime, TTFT is equivalent to the
latency of the prefill phase. TPOT is approximated by averaging the latency of the subsequent decoding steps required to
generate the entirety of the output sequence.
Algorithm 1 outlines the procedure for calculating these
metrics. It employs a stride-based optimization (Step 13) to
reduce the computational overhead of estimating generation
latency, interpolating costs over intervals rather than querying
the database for every token step.

The decode/generation phase generates the remaining
output tokens one at a time in a step-by-step auto-regressive
fashion. Newly generated tokens are utilized as the input for
the subsequent step, and cached key-value pairs are used to
avoid recomputing key-value pairs for the past tokens. This
phase is normally memory intensive and specialized kernels
like XQA [2] are utilized in this phase.
While prefill and decode constitute the fundamental computational stages of LLM inference, real-world performance
depends heavily on how the serving engine orchestrates them.
A naive abstraction is insufficient to capture the nuances of
different scheduling strategies. Therefore, AIConfigurator explicitly models three distinct serving modes—Static, Aggregated, and Disaggregated—each of which handles resource
contention and phase interleaving differently. We first define
the baseline behavior under the static mode.

4.2.2

Aggregated Mode

Also known as inflight batching or continuous batching [24],
this serving mode is distinguished by its ability to mix prefill and decode steps from different requests within a single
inference iteration, as shown in Figure 3(B). This flexibility
significantly improves GPU resource utilization compared to
static serving, leading to higher system throughput.
Our performance model, detailed in Algorithm 2, approximates this behavior by dividing execution into two distinct
stages:
Mixed Phase: This phase represents the steady-state operation of a continuous batching system where prefill and
decode requests run concurrently. The scheduler prioritizes
utilizing the available context capacity (Cctx ) to process prefill
requests. By default a prefill request will contain a ISL number of tokens, and context chunking can be optionally enabled
to split full ISL number of context tokens into multiple prefill
requests. The remaining batch slots are allocated to decoding
gen
tasks (Nmix ). Crucially, when the prefill workload is heavy
(context processing time exceeds generation time), our model
(Algorithm 2, lines 6-10) throttles the number of concurrent
decode streams using a rate-matching heuristic. This prevents
the "starvation" scenario where decode requests finish faster
than new requests can be prefilled. The step latency (Lmix )
in this phase is dominated by the compute-intensive prefill
attention.
Generation-Only Phase: This phase models the tail end
of a workload or periods of low arrival rate where the prefill queue has been drained. The system transitions to a pure
decoding regime, dedicating all batch slots (B) to autoregressive generation. The step latency (Lgen ) here is significantly
lower, typically bounded by memory bandwidth rather than
compute.
We estimate TTFT based on the latency of the Mixed Phase,
incorporating an empirical correction factor (Fcorr ) modeled
as a piecewise linear function. This factor accounts for base
scheduling overhead (constant term), proportional queuing
delay as the context backlog grows, and a saturation limit to
reflect system-level admission controls. For TPOT, we employ
a weighted average of latencies from both phases. Notably,

Algorithm 1 Static Mode Inference Performance Estimation
Require: ISL (Input Length), OSL (Output Length)
Require: B (Batch Size), P (Prefix Length)
Require: Stride Sstride (Default: 32)
Require: Function G ET S TEP L ATENCY(batch_size,
seq_len, phase)
1: Phase 1: Context Latency (TTFT)
2: ISLe f f ← ISL − P
3:
▷ Calculate latency for processing the input prompt
4: TTFT ← G ET S TEP L ATENCY(B, ISLe f f , ’prefill’)
5: Phase 2: Generation Latency (Total Generation Time)
6: Tgen ← 0
7: if OSL > 1 then
8:
k←0
9:
while k < OSL − 1 do
10:
Sseq ← ISL + k + 1
▷ Current total sequence
length
11:
▷ Query latency for a single decode step at
current length
12:
Tstep ← G ET S TEP L ATENCY(B, Sseq , ’decode’)
13:
R ← min(Sstride , OSL − 1 − k) ▷ Interpolate for
next R tokens
14:
Tgen ← Tgen + (Tstep × R)
15:
k ← k + Sstride
16:
end while
17: end if
18: Phase 3: TPOT Calculation
19: if OSL > 1 then
20:
TPOT ← Tgen /(OSL − 1)
21: else
22:
TPOT ← 0
23: end if
24: return TTFT, TPOT

5

4.2.3

we apply a small offset (3 steps) to the mixed phase duration
when calculating weights (Algorithm 2, Step 5). This heuristic
filters out scheduling jitter often observed in the initial steps
of a batch, providing a more robust estimate of steady-state
decoding performance. This approach models the non-linear
interference between prefill and decode operations without
requiring a full discrete-event simulation.
Algorithm 2 Aggregated Mode (Continuous Batching) Performance Estimation
Require: ISL, OSL
Require: B (Batch Size), Cctx (Context Token Capacity)
Require: Helper Functions:
G ET M IX L AT(Nctx , Ngen , ISL, OSL)
G ET G EN L AT(Ngen , ISL, OSL)
1: Step 1: Phase Duration (in Steps)
2: Ttotal_ctx ← ⌈(ISL × B)/Cctx ⌉ ▷ Total steps to process all
context
3: Step 2: Workload Distribution (Steps & Tokens)
4: if B > 1 then
5:
if Ttotal_ctx ≥ OSL then
6:
▷ Context dominates; generation slots are limited
7:
Tmix ← Ttotal_ctx
8:
Tgen ← 0
ctx ← C
9:
Nmix
▷ Tokens per step
ctx
gen
10:
Nmix ← max(1, ⌊B/(Ttotal_ctx /OSL)⌋) ▷ Tokens
per step
11:
else
12:
▷ Standard continuous batching
13:
Tmix ← Ttotal_ctx
14:
Tgen ← OSL − Tmix
ctx ← C
15:
Nmix
ctx
gen
16:
Nmix ← B − ⌈Cctx /ISL⌉
▷ Fill remaining slots
gen
17:
assert Nmix ≥ 1
18:
end if
19: else
20:
▷ Single Batch (B = 1)
21:
Tmix ← 1, Tgen ← OSL − 1
gen
ctx ← C ,
22:
Nmix
Nmix ← 0
ctx
23: end if
24: Step 3: Latency Calculation
ctx , N gen , ISL, OSL)
25: Lmix ← G ET M IX L AT (Nmix
mix
26: Lgen ← G ET G EN L AT(B, ISL, OSL)
27: Step 4: TTFT
 Estimation 
T
−3
,4
28: Fcorr ← min 2 + total_ctx
20
29: TTFT ← Lmix × ⌈ISL/Cctx ⌉ × Fcorr
30: Step 5: TPOT Estimation
′ ← max(1, T
31: Tmix
mix − 3)
32: if B > 1 then
L ×T ′ +Lgen ×Tgen
33:
TPOT ← mix Tmix
′
mix +Tgen
34: else
35:
TPOT ← Lgen
36: end if
37: return TTFT, TPOT

Disaggregated Mode

Algorithm 3 Disaggregated Mode Performance Estimation
Require: Candidate Configs: C pre (Prefill), Cdec (Decode)
T T FT ), Max TPOT
Require: Constraints: Max TTFT (Llimit
T
POT
(Llimit )
Require: Valid Total GPU Counts: Gvalid
Require: Degradation Factors: α pre = 0.9, αdec = 0.92
Require: TTFT Correction Factor: βT T FT = 1.8
1: Step 1: Filter Candidates by Latency
2:
▷ Filter prefill configs (c pre ) and decode configs (cdec )
T T FT }
3: C′pre ← {c ∈ C pre | (L pre (c) × βT T FT ) ≤ Llimit
′
T
POT
4: Cdec ← {c ∈ Cdec | Ldec (c) ≤ Llimit }
5: Step 2: Rate Matching (Find Optimal x, y)
/ MaxT hruGPU ← 0
6: BestCon f ig ← 0,
′
7: for cdec ∈ Cdec
do
8:
for c pre ∈ C′pre do
9:
T hru pre ← SeqThroughput(c pre )
10:
T hrudec ← SeqThroughput(cdec )
11:
G pre ← GPUs(c pre ), Gdec ← GPUs(cdec )
12:
▷ Sweep worker counts x (prefill) and y (decode)
13:
for x ∈ [1, 32], y ∈ [1, 64] do
14:
Gtotal ← x · G pre + y · Gdec
15:
if Gtotal ∈
/ Gvalid then continue
16:
end if
17:
R pre ← T hru pre · x · α pre
18:
Rdec ← T hrudec · y · αdec
19:
Rsys ← min(R pre , Rdec )
▷ System Rate
20:
T hruGPU ← Rsys /Gtotal
21:
if T hruGPU > MaxT hruGPU then
22:
MaxT hruGPU ← T hruGPU
23:
BestCon f ig
←
{TTFT
:
L pre (c pre ), TPOT : Ldec (cdec ), . . . }
24:
end if
25:
end for
26:
end for
27: end for
28: return BestCon f ig

In contrast to the static and aggregated modes, the Disaggregated Mode employs two distinct worker pools, each dedicated to a specific phase of LLM inference. As illustrated in
Figure 3(C), incoming requests are first processed by dedicated prefill workers. Upon completion of the prefill phase,
the computed key-value (KV) cache and intermediate states
are transferred to decode workers, which generate subsequent
tokens in an autoregressive manner.
This decoupling offers significant architectural advantages:
it eliminates prefill-decode interference and allows each pool
to employ distinct model parallelism strategies specialized for
its specific workload characteristics—optimizing computebound prefill and memory-bound decoding independently.
6

This separation has been shown to significantly improve overall system Goodput in prior studies [28].
From a modeling perspective, AIConfigurator estimates
the performance of a disaggregated system in two stages.
Firstly, it independently sweeps the search space for prefill and
decode configurations, treating each candidate as an isolated
static instance and estimating its base latency using Algorithm
1. It applies a correction factor (βT T FT ) to the prefill latency
to account for the KV-cache transmission overhead inherent
to disaggregated architectures.
Secondly, it constructs valid composite servers—denoted
as (x)P(y)D, where x and y represent the number of prefill
and decode instances, respectively—through a rate-matching
process. The algorithm identifies the optimal configuration by
maximizing the effective per-GPU throughput (T hruGPU ),
derived from the system rate Rsys :

For instance, Figure 4 depicts a typical composition of operators while performing inference with an MoE model. The
entire inference step essentially amounts to running 4 types
of operators, namely embedding, GEMM, Attention(prefill or
decode, depending on the phase) and MoE for a number of
times. If expert parallelism is added to the mix, it will scale
down the size of MoE operator while adding a pair of communication operators, and the exact pair shall depend on the
inference engine backend used in production.
Given the above observations, in AIConfigurator, we model
the latency of an inference iteration step by aggregating the
performance profiles of its constituent operators.

Rsys = min(R pre , Rdec )
where R represents the request rate (requests per second) of
the respective worker pools, discounted by interference factors
α. Once the optimal (x)P(y)D configuration is identified, the
system’s TTFT is derived from the latency of the selected prefill workers pool (including transfer overhead), while TPOT
is determined by the latency of the decode workers pool. Algorithm 3 details this optimization procedure.

4.3

Figure 4: A step of LLM inference can be decomposed into repeated
execution of a few key operators. For instance, the inference step of a
typical MoE model normally involves the above depicted operators,
and how expert parallelism is implemented depends on the specific
backend used.

Iteration-level Modeling

The effectiveness of all three of the algorithms introduced thus
far depends on how accurately we can predict the latency of a
given inference iteration step. For instance, in Algorithm 1, we
rely on the latency data of prefill-only step and decode-step acquired via G ET S TEP L ATENCY(batch_size, seq_len, phase)
to perform further estimation, while in Algorithm 2, besides
decode-only step (G ET G EN L AT(Ngen , ISL, OSL)), we must
also obtain accurate latency measurement for the mixed step
(G ET M IX L AT(Nctx , Ngen , ISL, OSL)) in order to move forward. Therefore, aiming at establishing a fast and robust way
of estimating the latency of a given iteration step, AIConfigurator approaches this issue by fully exploiting the decomposable nature of the modern LLM inference.
4.3.1

4.4

Operator Database

AIConfigurator constructs a performance database through
offline profiling on actual GPU hardware, currently supporting
TensorRT-LLM, vLLM, and SGLang.
Database Coverage. The database includes: (1) GEMM
operations parameterized by dimensions (M, N, K) and quantization (FP16, FP8, INT8, INT4); (2) Attention operations
for both compute-bound context attention and memory-bound
generation attention, supporting MHA [22], GQA [7], and
MLA [9]; (3) Communication primitives including AllReduce, AllGather, AllToAll, and point-to-point transfers across
message sizes and GPU counts; (4) MoE operations with
dispatch/combine [25] patterns; and (5) Hardware specifications (memory bandwidth, compute throughput, interconnect
bandwidth).
Data Collection. We combine three strategies: exhaustive
profiling sweeps parameters (batch size, sequence length, hidden dimension) with framework-native tools (∼30 GPU-hours
per platform-framework pair); interpolation estimates latencies for intermediate configurations using profiled data points;
and Speed-of-Light estimation provides analytical bounds via
roofline models for unprofiled operators.

Decompose Iteration Into Operators

As modern LLMs are composed of repetitive transformer
layers, any inference iteration step can then be modeled as
running a fixed sequence of operators for a number of times,
typically depending on the number of layers that the model
possesses. Introducing modern parallel strategies does not
alter this fundamental property except for inserting a few
well-defined communication operators at fixed positions of
the iteration’s execution path and scaling down the compute
operators by sharding inputs across multiple compute devices.
7

4.4.1

Power Law Correction for MoE

Effect of (α) on Expert Load Balancing

Normalized Load

MoE operator performance depends heavily on token distribution. Prior works [10, 14] show that during inference, certain
experts receive disproportionately more tokens—observations
from Qwen3-235B indicate ∼70% of compute is handled by
only 20% of active experts. To account for this imbalance,
AIConfigurator implements a controlled token assignment
procedure that emulates power-law distributions observed in
production (Figure 5).
Step 1: Sample Expert Load Weights. We generate a
load profile by sampling E weights (one per expert) from
a power-law distribution. Using inverse transform sampling
with U ∼ Uniform(0, 1), each raw weight is computed as:
 1−α
 1
1−α
1−α 1−α
xi = (xmax
− xmin
) ·U + xmin
(3)

E1

E2 E3 E4 E5 E6 E7
Experts (Ranked by Usage)

E8

Figure 5: Visualizing the effect of α. As α increases, the routing distribution shifts from perfectly balanced (uniform) to highly skewed,
where the top-ranked experts (E1, E2) handle the majority of tokens.

Setup. Experiments were conducted on a single NVIDIA
H100 SXM node with 8 GPUs (80GB HBM3 each) connected
via NVSwitch. We evaluated two models spanning different sizes and architectures: Qwen3-32B (32B parameters,
dense, FP8) and Qwen3-235B (235B parameters, Mixture-ofExperts with 128 experts, FP8). All models were served using
TensorRT-LLM v1.0.0. To assess cross-framework generalization, we also evaluated Qwen3-32B using vLLM v0.11.0.
We swept a comprehensive configuration space to stresstest prediction accuracy across diverse operating points:
• Input Sequence Length (ISL): 128–4096 tokens
• Output Sequence Length (OSL): 128–512 tokens
• Concurrency: 4–128 concurrent requests
• Tensor Parallelism (TP): 1, 2, 4, 8 GPUs
• Expert Parallelism (EP): 1, 2, 4, 8 GPUs (for Qwen3235B)
This yields 960 unique configurations for TensorRT-LLM
(360 for Qwen3-32B and 600 for Qwen3-235B) plus 128
configurations for vLLM, covering workloads from latencysensitive chat to throughput-oriented batch processing.
Metrics. We measure prediction fidelity using Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) for two key latency metrics:
Time-Per-Output-Token (TPOT), which determines generation throughput, and Time-To-First-Token (TTFT), which
governs user-perceived responsiveness.
Results. Figure 6 presents the fidelity analysis across
both frameworks. For TPOT prediction, AIConfigurator
achieves an overall MAPE of 7.8% with strong correlation
across all models: Qwen3-32B-TRTLLM (8.2%, r=0.96),
Qwen3-235B-MoE-TRTLLM (6.8%, r=0.98), and Qwen332B-VLLM (11.9%, r=0.99). The MoE model achieves the
lowest error, validating our power-law workload modeling
for expert load imbalance. The consistent accuracy across

where Ttotal is the batch size, K is the top-k routing factor
(each token routes to K experts), and Ni is the number of
tokens assigned to expert i. Residual tokens from rounding
are distributed to balance the total. The parameter α controls
the skew: α ≈ 0 yields nearly uniform load (theoretical ideal),
while α ≈ 1.2 produces heavy-tailed distributions where a few
“hot” experts receive most tokens—matching observations
from models like Qwen3-235B.
Step 2: Construct Synthetic Router Assignments. During normal inference, a learned gating network routes each token to its assigned expert(s). For controlled benchmarking, we
bypass this router and directly inject a synthetic assignment
matrix L ∈ RTtotal ×E , where exactly Ni tokens are deterministically routed to expert i. This eliminates stochastic variance
from the router and ensures the hardware executes the precise
workload shape from Step 1—allowing us to capture the "tail
latency" caused by the most heavily loaded expert, which
determines overall throughput in practice.

Evaluation

We evaluate AIConfigurator along three dimensions: (1) prediction fidelity against ground-truth hardware measurements,
(2) search efficiency compared to exhaustive benchmarking,
and (3) practical performance gains in production scenarios.
Each subsection describes its own experimental setup.

5.1

0.2

0

where xmin and xmax define the distribution bounds, and α
controls the degree of imbalance. These weights are then
normalized to obtain the token count for each expert:
!
xi
Ni = round
× Ttotal × K
(4)
∑E−1
j=0 x j

5

α = 0.0 (Balanced)
α = 1.01 (Zipfian)
α = 1.2 (High Skew)

0.4

Aggregated Serving Fidelity

We first evaluate AIConfigurator’s prediction accuracy for
aggregated (continuous batching) serving, the most common
deployment mode in production LLM inference.
8

• Data Parallelism (DP): 1, 2, 4, 8
• Expert Parallelism (EP): 1, 2, 4, 8
Configurations exceeding memory capacity were automatically pruned. This sweep produced a Pareto frontier
of optimal throughput-vs-speed trade-offs.
2. Ground-truth validation: We benchmarked each
Pareto-optimal configuration on actual TensorRT-LLM
and measured MAPE between AIConfigurator predictions and ground-truth measurements.
Results. Figure 7 compares AIConfigurator projections
against TensorRT-LLM measurements. Across all configurations, we observed a MAPE of 25.49% for system throughput
and 14.94% for generation speed. Notably, within the interactive speed region of 25–50 tokens/s/user (indicated by dashed
green lines), which represents comfortable reading speed for
most users, fidelity improves significantly: MAPEs reduce
to 13.19% for throughput and 3.35% for generation speed.
This demonstrates that AIConfigurator predictions are most
accurate precisely where they matter most—the operating
region where production deployments typically target.

Figure 6: Prediction fidelity for aggregated serving across
TensorRT-LLM and vLLM on H100 SXM. Each point represents one configuration; the diagonal indicates perfect prediction. TTFT values > 1000ms are filtered as outliers.

TensorRT-LLM and vLLM demonstrates that our operatorlevel modeling generalizes well—the core computational patterns (GEMM, attention, communication) are predictable regardless of framework.
TTFT prediction also demonstrates strong fidelity: Qwen332B-TRTLLM achieves 22.1% MAPE (r=0.89), Qwen3235B-MoE-TRTLLM achieves 18.3% MAPE (r=0.66), and
Qwen3-32B-VLLM achieves 16.9% MAPE (r=0.95). Notably, vLLM shows the best TTFT prediction accuracy, likely
due to its more predictable prefill scheduling compared to
TensorRT-LLM’s batching heuristics. Extreme outliers (TTFT
> 1000ms) are excluded as they represent pathological queuing delays rather than steady-state operation. The strong correlation across both metrics confirms AIConfigurator’s utility
for configuration selection across heterogeneous framework
deployments.

5.2

5.3

Search Efficiency

Table 1: Configuration search efficiency: AIConfigurator vs.
GPU benchmarking on H100 SXM.
Model

Disaggregated Serving Fidelity

Beyond aggregated mode, we evaluated AIConfigurator’s prediction fidelity for multi-node disaggregated serving, where
prefill and decode phases run on separate GPU pools.
Setup. Experiments were conducted on two compute nodes,
each equipped with 8 NVIDIA Hopper GPUs interconnected
via NVLink. One node was dedicated to prefill while the
other handled decode, with parallelism settings configured
independently per node. We evaluated the full-size DeepSeek
V3 [16] model (671B parameters, MoE) using TensorRTLLM as the serving backend.
Unlike aggregated mode where we measure per-request
TTFT and TPOT, disaggregated serving requires system-level
metrics: generation speed (tokens/s/user) and system throughput (total tokens/s). We evaluated AIConfigurator in two steps:
1. Configuration search: AIConfigurator explored the configuration space for two input profiles (ISL 5k and 6k
tokens, OSL 1k tokens) under a 5-second TTFT constraint. The search space included:
• Tensor Parallelism (TP): 1, 2, 4, 8

AIConfigurator

GPU Bench

Speedup

Total time (all configurations)
Llama3.1-8B (339 configs)
Qwen3-32B FP8 (358 configs)
Qwen3-235B FP8 (506 configs)

0.52s
0.72s
0.84s

24.4 hr
35.4 hr
99.5 hr

171,000×
177,000×
427,000×

Median time per configuration
Llama3.1-8B
Qwen3-32B FP8
Qwen3-235B FP8

1.5ms
1.5ms
1.5ms

4.0 min
5.4 min
11.5 min

162,000×
214,000×
459,000×

A critical advantage of AIConfigurator is its ability to explore the configuration space on CPU, eliminating the need
for exhaustive GPU benchmarking. To quantify this efficiency
gain, we compare the time required for AIConfigurator to evaluate the search space of configurations against the wall-clock
time needed to benchmark the same configurations.
Table 1 presents the efficiency comparison across three
models of varying complexity. Note that the "GPU time"
represents the end-to-end wall-clock time including weight
loading, server startup, and benchmark execution. AIConfigurator completes configuration search in sub-second time on
CPU, while equivalent GPU benchmarking requires days of
GPU time. For example, for Qwen3-235B (506 configurations), AIConfigurator achieves a 427,000× speedup (0.8s vs.
99.5 GPU-hours).
Notably, median per-configuration simulation time remains
constant at ∼1.5ms regardless of model size, as AIConfigurator’s operator-level database queries scale with model architecture rather than parameter count. In contrast, per-configuration
9

Figure 7: AIConfigurator projected Pareto frontier (red) vs. TensorRT-LLM ground truth (blue) for DeepSeek V3 deployed across two nodes
using prefill/decode disaggregation. Shaded region indicates the discrepancy between AIConfigurator’s projections and framework reality.

benchmarking time grows with model complexity due to
longer weight loading and inference times, ranging from 4 to
11.5 minutes.
This efficiency enables practitioners to rapidly iterate on deployment scenarios—adjusting SLA targets, exploring different hardware allocations, or evaluating new model variants—
without incurring prohibitive GPU costs.

5.4

with TensorRT-LLM backend (v0.5.0) and AI-Perf [6] for
load testing. Request concurrency matches the maximum
batch size to maximize throughput, with 20× oversampling
to mitigate warmup effects on TTFT measurements.
Aggregated Baseline. Using AIConfigurator, we identified
the optimal aggregated configuration: a single TP2 instance
with batch size 8, achieving 321.5 tokens/s/GPU and 95.9
tokens/s/user (Table 2). We validated this as the global optimum by exhaustively benchmarking all valid TP and batch
size combinations.
Disaggregated Optimization. AIConfigurator explored
the disaggregated configuration space in tens of seconds and
identified a prefill/decode split: 4 prefill replicas (TP1) and
2 decode replicas (TP2), with batch sizes of 1 and 80 respectively. This configuration achieves 648.3 tokens/s/GPU—
a 101.6% throughput improvement over the aggregated
baseline—while satisfying all SLA constraints (Table 2).
Projection Accuracy. To validate AIConfigurator’s predictions across the Pareto frontier, we benchmarked all recommended configurations under a relaxed TTFT constraint
of 2000ms (Figure 8). The AIConfigurator-projected frontier
closely tracks ground-truth measurements, with maximum deviations of 11.2% for generation speed and 17.4% for system
throughput at identical concurrency levels.

Case Study: Finding the Optimal

We demonstrate AIConfigurator’s practical value by finding
optimal serving configurations for a production deployment
scenario, comparing aggregated vs. disaggregated serving
under realistic SLA constraints.

6

Related Work

LLM Inference Systems. Modern serving has evolved from
static batching to dynamic scheduling via Orca [24] (continuous batching), vLLM [13] (PagedAttention), SGLang [27]
(RadixAttention), and TensorRT-LLM [2] (optimized kernels).
Model parallelism techniques—TP [21], PP [12], EP [16]—
distribute large models across GPUs with complex performance trade-offs. Disaggregated architectures [18,19,28] separate prefill/decode phases for independent scaling. AIConfigurator targets these systems, automating configuration selection rather than proposing new scheduling algorithms.
Performance Simulation. Vidur [4] and APEX [15] en-

Figure 8: AIConfigurator projections vs. ground-truth measurements for Qwen3-32B-FP8 on 8 H200 GPUs. The Pareto
frontiers show throughput-vs-speed trade-offs; disaggregated
serving achieves 2× higher throughput than the optimal aggregated configuration while meeting SLA constraints.
Setup. We target the following SLA requirements: TTFT ≤
1200ms, generation speed ≥ 60 tokens/s/user, on 8 NVIDIA
H200 SXM GPUs. The workload consists of ISL = 4000 and
OSL = 500 tokens. All experiments use NVIDIA Dynamo
10

Table 2: Optimal aggregated vs. disaggregated configurations for Qwen3-32B-FP8 on 8 H200 GPUs under production SLA
(TTFT ≤ 1200ms, speed ≥ 60 tokens/s/user). P = prefill, D = decode.
Mode

Throughput (tokens/s/GPU)

Speed (tokens/s/user)

TTFT (ms)

Batch Size

Configuration

321.5
648.3

95.9
78.4

1017.5
1068.9

8
P:1, D:80

1 × TP2
P: 4 × TP1, D: 2 × TP2

Aggregated
Disaggregated

able rapid configuration exploration via discrete-event simulation and cost optimization. However, these rely on analytical
roofline models that abstract framework-specific behavior.
AIConfigurator differs through its data-driven foundation:
measuring actual execution times on target hardware and
composing these measurements to predict end-to-end performance, capturing implementation-specific overheads that
analytical models miss. Unlike static resources like InferenceMax [20] benchmarks and deployment recipes [3], AIConfigurator provides algorithmic search that generalizes across
novel workload combinations.

7

Conclusion

We presented AIConfigurator, a data-driven toolkit for optimizing LLM inference configurations across TensorRT-LLM,
vLLM, and SGLang. By decomposing inference into fundamental operations and measuring their latencies on target
hardware, AIConfigurator achieves high-fidelity performance
predictions that capture framework-specific overheads missed
by analytical simulators. The toolkit evaluates thousands of
configurations in seconds on CPU, eliminating expensive
GPU benchmarking campaigns.
Our evaluation demonstrates strong prediction accuracy (6–
12% MAPE for TPOT) across dense and MoE architectures,
with production case studies showing 2× throughput improvements via automated disaggregated configuration discovery.
Integration with NVIDIA Dynamo also enables seamless deployment of optimized configurations. Future work includes
extending to additional hardware platforms, incorporating
cost models, and supporting emerging techniques like speculative decoding and sparse attention.

11

References

[11] G OLOVIN , D., S OLNIK , B., M OITRA , S., KOCHANSKI , G., K ARRO ,
J., AND S CULLEY, D. Google vizier: A service for black-box optimization. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (2017), pp. 1487–1495.

[1] GitHub - ai-dynamo/dynamo: A Datacenter Scale Distributed Inference Serving Framework — github.com. https://github.com/
ai-dynamo/dynamo. [Accessed 23-11-2025].

[12] H UANG , Y., C HENG , Y., BAPNA , A., F IRAT, O., C HEN , D., C HEN ,
M., L EE , H., N GIAM , J., L E , Q. V., W U , Y., ET AL . Gpipe: Efficient
training of giant neural networks using pipeline parallelism. Advances
in neural information processing systems 32 (2019).

[2] GitHub - NVIDIA/TensorRT-LLM: TensorRT LLM provides users
with an easy-to-use Python API to define Large Language Models (LLMs) and supports state-of-the-art optimizations to perform
inference efficiently on NVIDIA GPUs. TensorRT LLM also contains components to create Python and C++ runtimes that orchestrate the inference execution in a performant way. — github.com.
https://github.com/NVIDIA/TensorRT-LLM. [Accessed 23-112025].

[13] K WON , W., L I , Z., Z HUANG , S., S HENG , Y., Z HENG , L., Y U , C. H.,
G ONZALEZ , J., Z HANG , H., AND S TOICA , I. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In
Proceedings of the 29th symposium on operating systems principles
(2023), pp. 611–626.

[3] GitHub - vllm-project/recipes: Common recipes to run vLLM —
github.com. https://github.com/vllm-project/recipes. [Accessed 23-11-2025].

[14] L EPIKHIN , D., L EE , H., X U , Y., C HEN , D., F IRAT, O., H UANG , Y.,
K RIKUN , M., S HAZEER , N., AND C HEN , Z. Gshard: Scaling giant models with conditional computation and automatic sharding. In
International Conference on Learning Representations (2021).

[4] AGRAWAL , A., K EDIA , N., M OHAN , J., PANWAR , A., K WATRA , N.,
G ULAVANI , B. S., R AMJEE , R., AND T UMANOV, A. Vidur: A largescale simulation framework for llm inference. Proceedings of Machine
Learning and Systems 6 (2024), 351–366.

[15] L IN , Y.-C., K WON , W., P INEDA , R., AND PARAVECINO , F. N. Apex:
An extensible and dynamism-aware simulator for automated parallel
execution in llm serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.17651 (2024).
[16] L IU , A., F ENG , B., X UE , B., WANG , B., W U , B., L U , C., Z HAO ,
C., D ENG , C., Z HANG , C., RUAN , C., ET AL . Deepseek-v3 technical
report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437 (2024).

[5] AGRAWAL , A., K EDIA , N., PANWAR , A., M OHAN , J., K WATRA ,
N., G ULAVANI , B., T UMANOV, A., AND R AMJEE , R. Taming
{Throughput-Latency} tradeoff in {LLM} inference with {SarathiServe}. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI 24) (2024), pp. 117–134.

[17] M IAO , X., WANG , Y., J IANG , Y., S HI , C., Z HU , X., Z HANG , Z., AND
C UI , B. Galvatron: Efficient transformer training over multiple gpus
using automatic parallelism. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 16,
3 (2022), 470–479.

[6] AI DYNAMO T EAM. Aiperf: A comprehensive benchmarking tool
for generative ai models. https://github.com/ai-dynamo/aiperf,
2025. Accessed: 2025-12-11.

[18] PATEL , P., C HOUKSE , E., Z HANG , C., S HAH , A., G OIRI , Í., M ALEKI ,
S., AND B IANCHINI , R. Splitwise: Efficient generative llm inference
using phase splitting. In 2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) (2024), IEEE, pp. 118–
132.

[7] A INSLIE , J., L EE -T HORP, J., DE J ONG , M., Z EMLYANSKIY, Y., L E BRÓN , F., AND S ANGHAI , S. Gqa: Training generalized multi-query
transformer models from multi-head checkpoints, 2023.
[8] DAO , T., F U , D. Y., E RMON , S., RUDRA , A., AND R É , C. FlashAttention: Fast and memory-efficient exact attention with IO-awareness. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2022).

[19] Q IN , R., L I , Z., H E , W., C UI , J., TANG , H., R EN , F., M A , T., C AI ,
S., Z HANG , Y., Z HANG , M., ET AL . Mooncake: A kvcache-centric
disaggregated architecture for llm serving. ACM Transactions on
Storage (2024).

[9] D EEP S EEK -AI, L IU , A., F ENG , B., WANG , B., WANG , B., L IU , B.,
Z HAO , C., D ENGR , C., RUAN , C., DAI , D., G UO , D., YANG , D.,
C HEN , D., J I , D., L I , E., L IN , F., L UO , F., H AO , G., C HEN , G., L I ,
G., Z HANG , H., X U , H., YANG , H., Z HANG , H., D ING , H., X IN ,
H., G AO , H., L I , H., Q U , H., C AI , J. L., L IANG , J., G UO , J., N I ,
J., L I , J., C HEN , J., Y UAN , J., Q IU , J., S ONG , J., D ONG , K., G AO ,
K., G UAN , K., WANG , L., Z HANG , L., X U , L., X IA , L., Z HAO , L.,
Z HANG , L., L I , M., WANG , M., Z HANG , M., Z HANG , M., TANG ,
M., L I , M., T IAN , N., H UANG , P., WANG , P., Z HANG , P., Z HU , Q.,
C HEN , Q., D U , Q., C HEN , R. J., J IN , R. L., G E , R., PAN , R., X U ,
R., C HEN , R., L I , S. S., L U , S., Z HOU , S., C HEN , S., W U , S., Y E ,
S., M A , S., WANG , S., Z HOU , S., Y U , S., Z HOU , S., Z HENG , S.,
WANG , T., P EI , T., Y UAN , T., S UN , T., X IAO , W. L., Z ENG , W., A N ,
W., L IU , W., L IANG , W., G AO , W., Z HANG , W., L I , X. Q., J IN , X.,
WANG , X., B I , X., L IU , X., WANG , X., S HEN , X., C HEN , X., C HEN ,
X., N IE , X., S UN , X., WANG , X., L IU , X., X IE , X., Y U , X., S ONG ,
X., Z HOU , X., YANG , X., L U , X., S U , X., W U , Y., L I , Y. K., W EI ,
Y. X., Z HU , Y. X., X U , Y., H UANG , Y., L I , Y., Z HAO , Y., S UN , Y.,
L I , Y., WANG , Y., Z HENG , Y., Z HANG , Y., X IONG , Y., Z HAO , Y.,
H E , Y., TANG , Y., P IAO , Y., D ONG , Y., TAN , Y., L IU , Y., WANG , Y.,
G UO , Y., Z HU , Y., WANG , Y., Z OU , Y., Z HA , Y., M A , Y., YAN , Y.,
YOU , Y., L IU , Y., R EN , Z. Z., R EN , Z., S HA , Z., F U , Z., H UANG , Z.,
Z HANG , Z., X IE , Z., H AO , Z., S HAO , Z., W EN , Z., X U , Z., Z HANG ,
Z., L I , Z., WANG , Z., G U , Z., L I , Z., AND X IE , Z. Deepseek-v2: A
strong, economical, and efficient mixture-of-experts language model,
2024.

[20] S EMI A NALYSIS. InferenceMAX by SemiAnalysis — inferencemax.semianalysis.com. https://inferencemax.semianalysis.
com/. [Accessed 23-11-2025].
[21] S HOEYBI , M., PATWARY, M., P URI , R., L E G RESLEY, P., C ASPER ,
J., AND C ATANZARO , B. Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion parameter language models using model parallelism. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.08053 (2019).
[22] VASWANI , A., S HAZEER , N., PARMAR , N., U SZKOREIT, J., J ONES ,
L., G OMEZ , A. N., K AISER , L., AND P OLOSUKHIN , I. Attention is
all you need, 2023.
[23] WANG , L., YANG , J., L UO , Y., AND WANG , D. Morphling: Fast,
near-optimal auto-configuration for cloud-native model serving. In
Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing (2021),
pp. 63–77.
[24] Y U , G.-I., J EONG , J. S., K IM , G.-W., K IM , S., AND C HUN , B.-G.
Orca: A distributed serving system for {Transformer-Based} generative
models. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI 22) (2022), pp. 521–538.
[25] Z HAO , C., Z HOU , S., Z HANG , L., D ENG , C., X U , Z., L IU , Y., Y U , K.,
L I , J., AND Z HAO , L. Deepep: an efficient expert-parallel communication library. https://github.com/deepseek-ai/DeepEP, 2025.
[26] Z HENG , L., L I , Z., Z HANG , H., Z HUANG , Y., C HEN , Z., H UANG , Y.,
WANG , Y., X U , Y., Z HUO , D., X ING , E. P., ET AL . Alpa: Automating
inter- and intra-operator parallelism for distributed deep learning. In
16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 22) (2022), pp. 559–578.

[10] F EDUS , W., Z OPH , B., AND S HAZEER , N. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter models with simple and efficient sparsity.
Journal of Machine Learning Research 23, 120 (2022), 1–39.

12

[27] Z HENG , L., Y IN , L., X IE , Z., H UANG , J., S UN , C., Y U , C., C AO , S.,
KOZYRAKIS , C., S TOICA , I., G ONZALEZ , J. E., ET AL . Efficiently
programming large language models using sglang.
[28] Z HONG , Y., L IU , S., C HEN , J., H U , J., Z HU , Y., L IU , X., J IN , X.,
AND Z HANG , H. Distserve: Disaggregating prefill and decoding for
goodput-optimized large language model serving, 2024.

13

