arXiv:2411.17651v2 [cs.DC] 29 Apr 2025

APEX: An Extensible and Dynamism-Aware Simulator for
Automated Parallel Execution in LLM Serving
Yi-Chien Lin

Woosuk Kwon

yichienl@usc.edu
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California, USA

woosuk.kwon@berkeley.edu
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, California, USA

Ronald Pineda

Fanny Nina Paravecino

ronaldp10@ucla.edu
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, California, USA

fanny.nina@microsoft.com
Microsoft
Mountain View, California, USA

Abstract

ACM Reference Format:
Yi-Chien Lin, Woosuk Kwon, Ronald Pineda, and Fanny Nina Paravecino.
2018. APEX: An Extensible and Dynamism-Aware Simulator for Automated
Parallel Execution in LLM Serving. In Proceedings of Make sure to enter
the correct conference title from your rights confirmation emai (Conference
acronym ’XX). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/xxx.xxx

Efficiently serving Large Language Models (LLMs) requires selecting an optimal parallel execution plan, balancing computation,
memory, and communication overhead. However, determining the
best strategy is challenging due to varying parallelism techniques
(data, pipeline, tensor) and workload characteristics (e.g., computeintensive tasks with long prompts vs. memory-intensive tasks with
long generation). We propose APEX, an LLM serving system simulator that efficiently identifies optimal parallel execution plans by considering key factors of LLM serving systems, such as memory usage,
batching behavior, etc. APEX performs dynamism-aware simulation
to model iteration-level batching, and leverages LLMs’ repetitive
structure to reduce design space, scaling efficiently to trillion-scale
models. APEX abstracts the key components of LLM serving systems—including the model, batching module, quantization formats,
and device clusters—enabling the simulator to be general and extensible. Simulating on a CPU, APEX evaluates execution plans
for various device clusters, covering diverse LLMs and workloads.
APEX finds plans up to 3.37× faster than heuristics, and also plans
that reduce energy consumption by up to 45% compared to latencyoptimal plans. APEX performs comprehensive evaluations, reporting key system metrics like time per output token and time to first
token, which can help service providers meet SLOs. APEX identifies
an optimal plan within 15 minutes on a CPU, making it 71× faster
and 1234× more cost-effective than cloud-based GPU deployment.
APEX can be accessed at: https://github.com/microsoft/apex_plus

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have been successfully applied to
various applications, such as code generation [14, 50], questionanswering [32, 54], and many more [44, 51, 53]. Serving an LLM is
both memory- and compute-intensive, necessitating multi-device
clusters to achieve high performance. Several techniques have been
proposed to parallelize LLM, such as data parallelism (DP) [28],
pipeline parallelism (PP) [17], tensor parallelism (TP) [41], etc. Each
parallelism has its pros and cons: TP is memory efficient, as it does
not produce model replicas like DP, but it incurs an expensive communication overhead [41]. PP reduces communication overhead,
but can suffer from workload imbalance [17]. Hybrid parallelism
can effectively balance the trade-offs to improve performance, but
identifying the optimal parallel execution plan is non-trivial due
to the many factors involved, including computation workload,
network traffic, memory efficiency, etc. Furthermore, the optimal
parallel execution plan also depends on the characteristics of the input requests. Compute-intensive tasks (e.g., tasks with long prompts
like summarization) and memory-intensive tasks (e.g., tasks with
long generations like coding) favor different parallelism strategies.
A common practice is to adopt heuristic execution plans instead,
such as applying TP within the same node and PP across different
nodes [34, 43]. Yet, recent studies show that heuristics plans can be
2× slower than optimal configurations [20], underscoring the need
for service providers to search for and adopt an optimal parallel
execution plan rather than relying on heuristics.
To find an optimal execution plan, a straightforward way is to
deploy and evaluate parallel execution plans exhaustively; however, this is prohibitively expensive as it would take thousands of
GPU hours [1, 2]. An alternative is to leverage modeling-based approaches, such as performance models [20] or simulators [11, 46],
to estimate the performance of parallel execution plans; nevertheless, existing solutions developed for Deep Neural Network
[11, 46] or LLM training [4, 20] cannot be applied to LLM serving,
as serving systems introduce unique challenges: (1) Dynamism of

CCS Concepts
• Computing methodologies → Modeling and simulation;
Parallel computing methodologies.

Keywords
LLM Serving, Optimal Parallelism, Simulation
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06
https://doi.org/xxx.xxx
1

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Lin et al.

iteration-level batching: Unlike conventional ML systems that
use static batching, where all requests in a batch must be completed
before new ones are added, LLM serving systems [2, 24, 52] employ
iteration-level batching [45]. In this approach, incoming requests are
continuously added to the processing batch as memory becomes
available, resulting in dynamically changing batch sizes which are
hard to model. Moreover, some requests within the batch may be
in the prefill stage, while others are in the decode stage. This interleaving of stages further complicates the modeling, as these stages
have significantly different computational characteristics (details
in Section 2.1). (2) Exponentially-growing design space: The
design space grows exponentially with respect to the model size
and the number of devices in the cluster. Since LLM serving often involves large models and clusters, it is non-trivial to develop
a solution that can search for an optimal parallel execution plan
within a reasonable timeframe. (3) Adapting for continuouslyevolving systems: LLM serving system is an emerging area, with
continuous evolution in model architecture, hardware platforms,
and system optimizations such as quantization [16, 29] and parallelism techniques [30, 38]. Consequently, a performance model or a
simulator can easily become obsolete and inapplicable to the latest
LLM serving systems. Thus, keeping pace with the rapid evolution
of such systems is necessary but also challenging.
To this end, we propose APEX, an extensible and dynamismaware simulator for Automated Parallel EXecution in LLM serving.
Given an LLM, a device cluster, and input requests with varying
context/generation lengths, APEX generates an optimal parallel execution plan for LLM serving. APEX first generates various parallel
execution plans, each representing a unique way to parallelize the
model by combining various parallelisms (i.e., DP, PP, TP). APEX
then evaluates each plan by estimating the execution time of serving
the input requests through simulation. APEX performs dynamismaware simulation that is capable of modeling the characteristics of
iteration-level batching. After simulation, APEX provides a comprehensive evaluation for each execution plan with key LLM serving
metrics, such as time per output token (TPOT), time to first token
(TTFT), and energy consumption, among others [33]. This detailed
evaluation enables service providers to select execution plans optimized for various objectives (e.g., minimizing latency or energy
consumption) while meeting service-level objectives (SLOs).
Despite performing complex simulations, APEX remains highly
scalable by leveraging the repetitive structure of transformer models, significantly reducing design space and enabling simulations
at trillion-scale models across multi-node clusters. To model stateof-the-art LLM serving systems, APEX supports a broad range of
LLMs, parallelisms, quantization formats, and device clusters. Recognizing the rapid evolution of LLM serving, APEX is designed to
be modular and extensible, allowing easy integration of new models
and hardware with minimal effort. Additionally, APEX leverages
operation-level profilings to estimate the system execution time,
which allows APEX to adapt to different clusters by collecting performance data from the underlying platform. Note that APEX not
only supports GPU clusters but also ASIC clusters such as TPU
[23] and Intel Gaudi [19]. We evaluate APEX using a myriad of
LLMs, device clusters, and distinct workloads. APEX consistently
identifies optimal execution plans that outperform heuristic plans

while maintaining low simulation overhead. APEX is open-sourced:
https://github.com/microsoft/apex_plus. Our key contributions are:
• Automated parallel execution: We propose APEX, a simulator that automatically finds an optimal parallel execution
plan for a given LLM, a device cluster, and input requests.
• Dynamism-aware simulation: APEX models iterationlevel batching, capturing real-world LLM serving behavior.
• Accurate & effective: APEX delivers accurate speedup predictions, with an average relative error of just 10.7%. APEX
finds optimal plans up to 3.37× faster than heuristic plans,
and energy-optimal plans that reduce energy consumption
by up to 45% compared to latency-optimal plans.
• Broad compatibility and extensibility: APEX supports
various LLMs, parallelisms, quantizations, and device clusters, while allowing easy extension to new configurations.
• Cost-effective & scalable: APEX identifies an optimal plan
within 15 minutes on a CPU, making it 71× faster and 1234×
more cost-effective than cloud-based GPU deployment. It
also maintains similar simulation overhead when scaling
from billion-scale to trillion-scale models.
• Comprehensive evaluation: APEX reports key LLM-serving
metrics, which can help service providers meet SLOs.

2 Background
2.1 LLM Inference
Large Language Model (LLM) inference takes a user prompt as input,
and generates a response token by token. The sequential token
generation process is also known as auto-regressive generation [15],
which utilizes previously generated tokens as input to predict the
next token. The inference process of LLMs consists of two stages:
1. Prefill Stage: In the prefill stage, LLM processes the input request
(i.e., prompt) to set up intermediate states (keys and values) that
are used to predict the first token. Unlike token generation, the
computation of prefill does not rely on previously generated output
tokens, allowing the tokens of the input request to be processed
in parallel all at once. This high degree of parallelism makes the
prefill stage compute-bound [52].
2. Decode Stage: During the decode stage, LLM generates output
tokens autoregressively until a stopping criterion is met. The generation of each token depends on all previous tokens’ output states
(keys and values). The generation phase is often memory-bound
[29], as its latency is primarily determined by the data transfer time
of reading the output states from memory.

2.2

Device Clusters and Interconnections

To achieve high serving throughput and accommodate the large
model size, LLMs are often deployed on a cluster of devices. The
devices are connected in a tree-based network topology, which is
one of the most popular topologies for node deployment. The memory bandwidth and latency is uniform within each level. Figure 1
illustrates an example of a commonly used two-level device cluster.
Devices within the same node are typically connected by highbandwidth interconnects like NVLink [26] at level 1, while devices
across different nodes are connected via inter-node networks such
as InfiniBand [31] at level 2. In addition to GPUs, ASIC clusters are
2

APEX: An Extensible and Dynamism-Aware Simulator for Automated Parallel Execution in LLM Serving

Lv.2 Interconnection

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

LLM Configuration

Parallel Templates

Lv. 1 Interconnection

Device Cluster
Configuration

Device 7

Device 6

Device 5

Device 4

Device 3

Device 2

Device 1

Device 0

Node 0

Lv. 1 Interconnection

Request Traces

Node 1

Profiling Results
(Section 3.5)

LLM Serving Simulator
(Section 3.4)

Parallel
Execution Plans

Batching Module
(Section 3.3)

Intermediate Data

System Data

Plan 1
[2DP+2TP+2PP]
E2E Latency: 226 sec.
TTFT: 47 ms
TPOT: 21 ms

…

Input Data

also emerging, such as TPU and Gaudi clusters [19, 23]. These clusters also utilize tree-based network topologies for interconnection
and can be abstracted similarly as GPU clusters [8].

Simulation Reports
Output Data

Figure 2: System overview of APEX
model replicas like DP. Yet, TP incurs high collective communication overhead, such as AllReduce, which is prohibitively expensive
for interconnection networks with limited bandwidth like PCIe.
Expert Parallelism (EP): EP [38] is a special type of parallelism for
Mixture of Experts (MoE) models [6]. EP deploys different experts
across various devices. For MoE models, only a subset of experts
are activated for each input token. Thus, EP can result in workload
imbalance and resource under-utilization if none of the experts on
the device are activated; while this can be avoided by adopting TP,
where each device is assigned with a partition of all the experts, EP
incurs a lower communication overhead than TP.
Each parallelism has its own pros and cons, tradeing-off between computation, memory efficiency, collective communication
overhead, etc. Thus, it’s non-trivial to determine the optimal parallel execution plan, especially given that the parallelisms can be
adopted in a hybrid manner. Heuristic plans are typically adopted
for simplicity, such as applying TP to clusters with high-bandwidth
interconnections like NVLink [26], and applying PP to clusters without such networks [34, 43]. APEX aims to evaluate the complex
trade-offs among parallelism techniques to find optimal parallel
execution plans that outperform heuristic approaches.

LLM Serving and Iteration-Level Batching

LLMs are often hosted by service providers in the cloud [27]. Users
send requests to these providers through APIs or chatbots and
then receive responses generated by the LLMs. For LLM serving,
it is critical to achieve both low latency and high throughput: low
latency is necessary to meet service-level objectives, while high
throughput enables service providers to serve a large number of
users simultaneously. Due to the auto-regressive nature of LLMs,
the lengths of the generated responses can vary significantly. Consequently, the commonly used static batching leads to suboptimal
performance in LLM serving, as all the batched requests need to
wait for the longest response to be generated to proceed to batch
new requests. To overcome this inefficiency, iteration-level batching
[45] is proposed. Iteration-level batching continuously schedules
newly arrived request(s) into the existing batch whenever GPU
memory becomes available, rather than waiting for all the requests
to be completed. Iteration-level batching significantly improves the
serving throughput and is widely adopted in state-of-the-art LLM
serving systems [2, 24, 36, 52].

2.4

(Section 3.2)

Active requests

Figure 1: An example two-level device cluster. Memory bandwidth and latency are uniform within the same level.

2.3

Parallel Execution
Plan Generator

LLM Parallelisms

2.5

LLM is often served with multiple devices (Figure 1), and various
approaches have been proposed to parallelize LLM on the cluster.
We discuss several representative and widely-used parallelisms.
Data Parallelism (DP): In DP [28], the model is replicated across
multiple devices, and input requests are divided into mini-batches,
each processed independently by a replica. This approach avoids
communication overhead during execution, but comes at the cost of
increased memory usage due to model replication, thereby reducing
available memory for batching requests.
Pipeline Parallelism (PP): PP [17, 35] divides the model in a
layer-wise fashion. Each model partition consists of a subset of
layers, and each subset of layers forms a pipeline stage. The input
requests are split into micro-batches to flow through the pipeline
stages. PP requires point-to-point (p2p) communications between
the pipeline stages. In addition, PP suffers from pipeline stalls when
the execution time of each stage is unbalanced.
Tensor Parallelism (TP): TP [41] divides the model in an intralayer fashion, which splits individual layers across multiple devices. TP does not suffer from load imbalance like PP or produces

LLM Quantizations

Quantization is an essential technique for achieving performant
LLM serving, as it reduces both memory and computation overhead.
Various methods have been proposed to quantize one or more of
the following components to lower precision while preserving high
accuracy: (1) model weights, (2) activations, and (3) KV cache. For
example, AWQ [29] quantizes the model weights, and KVQuant
[29] focuses on quantizing the KV cache. State-of-the-art LLM serving systems like vLLM [24] and TensorRT-LLM [36] also support
W8A8 quantization, which quantizes both the model weights and
activations to FP8 format. Given the diversity of quantization methods, it is essential to flexibly support various techniques to find an
optimal parallel execution plan for LLM serving systems.

3 APEX Simulator Design
3.1 System Overview
We depict the workflow of APEX in Figure 2. User-provided input
data is shown in yellow-colored boxes, and built-in system data is
represented by red-colored cylinders. Given an LLM and a device
3

LLM Conf

Parallel Te

Device
Configu

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Lin et al.

s

Parallel Execution
Plan Generator

are
LLM Configuration

IR Converter

Transformer IR

Attention
Cell

Atten.
Head

Block

Parallel Templates

PP]
sec.

Parallel Scheme
Generator

GPT

Input Activation

Parallel
Schemes

…

Multi-H
Atten

Atten.
Head

Task

Multi-L
Percep

Feedforward
Cell

×N
Device Cluster
Configuration

Device Mapper

Output Activation

Parallel
Execution Plans

Figure 4: Transformer IR represents LLMs in a canonical way

ports

without network topology information. Next, the Device Mapper
assigns logical devices to physical devices, generating executable
parallel execution plans, which serve as inputs for the Batching
Module. This two-stage mapping approach (first to the logical and
then to physical device cluster) reduces the design complexity. We
discuss each module in detail below.

Figure 3: The Parallel Execution Plan Generator produces
plans that map a given LLM onto the target cluster using
distinct parallelization strategies
cluster, APEX generates multiple parallel execution plans using
built-in Parallel Templates. Each generated executon plan represents a distinct strategy for mapping the LLM across the cluster.
The Batching Module takes these generated plans and a trace of
requests as inputs, dynamically generating the processing batch
based on request arrival time and resource constraints. Specifically,
the Batching Module determines, at each iteration, whether a request should be added to or removed from the processing batch
and reports the active requests to the LLM Serving Simulator; the
Simulator then uses profiling results to estimate execution time and
energy consumption for processing the active requests, while also
tracking system metrics such as time to first token (TTFT), time per
output token (TPOT), P95 latency, among others. Once all requests
are processed, the simulator generates a simulation report for each
parallel execution plan. APEX can optimize towards different objectives by selecting the most suitable execution plan based on a
parametrizable target metric: It can optimize for energy-efficiency
by minimizing energy per inference, or can prioritize throughput
by reducing end-to-end latency, enabling flexible adaptation to diverse system goals. Suppose that we aim to find the latency-optimal
plan for serving Llama-3.1 70B on a cluster with 8 Nvidia H100
GPUs. APEX first generates multiple execution plans, such as 8-way
tensor parallelism, or a 4-way tensor parallelism combined with
2-way pipeline parallelism. Next, it utilizes a trace of requests as
input for simulation, such as the Azure LLM Traces [37]. APEX
simulates iteration-level batching to organize arriving requests into
the processing batch. Finally, the LLM Serving Simulator estimates
the execution time of each plan and select the one with the lowest
end-to-end latency for serving Llama-3.1 70B on the cluster.

3.2

3.2.1 IR Converter and Transformer IR. The Plan Generator converts an LLM into Transformer IR, a canonical representation of
transformer-based models, as illustrated in Figure 4. We develop
an IR converter that parses an LLM’s configuration file, extracting
parameters such as the number of attention heads and layers, and
translates the model into Transformer IR. In Transformer IR, an
LLM is represented as a chain of cells, where each cell corresponds
to key transformer operations, such as multi-head attention or the
feedforward network. For example, GPT-3 [5] can be represented
as a sequence of multi-head attention (MHA) cells and multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) cells, while Llama-3.1 [12] is modeled as a chain
of group query attention (GQA) cells [3] and SwiGLU cells [40].
Each cell consists of multiple tasks, such as individual attention
heads in an MHA cell or experts in a mixture-of-experts (MoE) cell.
Given that LLMs typically consist of repeated structures, we define
the smallest set of nonrepetitive adjacent cells as a block. Using
Transformer IR, an LLM is uniformly represented as multiple identical block, where each block consists of cells, and each cell contains
multiple tasks. Transformer IR abstracts an LLM by focusing solely
on key operations like MHA and MLP, while omitting operations
like tokenization and position embeddings, which are less relevant
for model parallelization. By focusing on key operations and leveraging the repetitive nature of LLMs through blocks, Transformer
IR reduces both the search space and the simulation runtime for
APEX. Furthermore, Transformer IR serves as a foundation for developing our Parallel Templates, which we describe in the following
subsection.

Parallel Execution Plan Generator

3.2.2 Parallel Templates and Parallel Schemes Generator. We develop Parallel Templates to generate parallel execution plans for
LLM serving. Given the wide variety of LLMs, exhaustively designing templates for each model is impractical. Instead, we develop our
Parallel Templates based on the Transformer IR, which provides a
unified abstraction of LLMs. This approach enables the developed
templates to support a broad range of models rather than being
tailored to specific ones. Figure 5 illustrates examples of our templates. Each cell type is associated with a pre-defined template that
specifies how it is parallelized across multiple devices. For instance,
if tensor parallelism (TP) is applied to both the multi-head attention

In this section, we describe the details of the Parallel Execution
Plan Generator, which constructs various parallel execution plans
to map the input LLM onto the target device cluster. The workflow of the Plan Generator is illustrated in Figure 3. The process
begins by converting the input LLM into Transformer IR, an intermediate representation that provides a canonical abstraction
for transformer-based models. Using this representation, the Plan
Generator produces multiple parallel schemes based on the Parallel Templates. A parallel scheme maps the model onto a logical
device cluster [47], a virtual overlay that abstracts hardware details
4

APEX: An Extensible and Dynamism-Aware Simulator for Automated Parallel Execution in LLM Serving
Device 0

Device 1

Device 0

Device 1

½ MHA

½ MHA

½ MHA

½ MHA

AllReduce
½ MLP

½ MLP

All-to-All
MLP
Replica 0

MLP
Replica 1

Algorithm 1 Parallel Scheme Generation

Input Activation

𝐻/D
Heads
Device 1

…

1: Input: LLM (in Transformer IR), Parallel Templates
2: Output: parallel_schemes
3: 𝑛 = num_of_devices_in_cluster
4: for 𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙_𝐷𝑃 = 1, 2, ..., 𝑛: do
⊲ model-level DP
5:
𝑚 = 𝑛 ÷ 𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙_𝐷𝑃
⊲ 𝑚 = num_repica_devices
6:
for 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒 = 1, 2, .., 𝑚 do
⊲ inter-layer parallelism
7:
𝑠 = 𝑚 ÷ 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒
⊲ 𝑠 = num_stage_devices
8:
for cell ∈ LLM.block do
9:
for 𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙_𝐷𝑃 = 1, 2, ..., 𝑠: do
⊲ cell-level DP
10:
𝑐 = 𝑠 ÷ 𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙_𝐷𝑃
⊲ 𝑐 = num_cell_devices
11:
task_mapping = templates(cell, c)
12:
cell_schemes.append(task_mapping)

𝐻/D
Heads
Device D

Resharding collective
Sync. collective

AllReduce

AllGather

Output Activation

(a). MHA (TP=2), MLP (TP=2)

(b). MHA (TP=2), MLP (DP=2)

(c). Parallel Template for MHA

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Figure 5: Examples of APEX’s Parallel Templates for two devices. The parameterized templates can extend to D devices.

13:
14:
15:

(MHA) cell and the multi-layer perceptron (MLP) cell, as shown
in Figure 5 (a), tasks (e.g., attention heads) are evenly distributed
across devices. Beyond task distribution, Parallel Templates also
manage collective communication between adjacent cells. In Figure 5 (a), an AllReduce operation synchronizes data between cells,
similar to the approach in Megatron-LM [41]. In Figure 5 (b), 2-way
data parallelism (DP) is applied to the MLP cell, while no DP is
applied to the MHA cell, leading to distinct model partitioning.
Consequently, All-to-All and AllGather operations are performed
for tensor resharding. While Figures 5 (a) and (b) depict simplified
examples using two devices, Parallel Templates are fully parameterized to support any number of devices, as in Figure 5 (c), where
𝐻 attention heads are evenly distributed across 𝐷 devices.
Given Parallel Templates and an LLM represented in Transformer
IR, the Parallel Scheme Generator constructs parallel schemes that
map the LLM onto a logical device cluster [47] using different combinations of parallelism techniques. A logical device cluster is a
virtual overlay that specifies the number of devices in a cluster without considering network topology. As a result, a parallel scheme
defines the parallelism applied to Transformer IR cells and their
collective communications (e.g., Figure 5 (a), (b)) without assigning
the cells to specific physical devices. Introducing logical device
clusters simplifies design complexity by decoupling Parallel Templates from the hierarchical network topology of physical clusters;
the Device Mapper later handles physical mappings. The Parallel Scheme Generator follows a hierarchical top-down approach,
starting with coarse-grained model-level parallelism and progressively refining to fine-grained cell-level parallelism. As detailed in
Algorithm 1, the Generator first selects the degree of model-level
data parallelism (i.e., number of model replicas) and partitions the
cluster accordingly. APEX enforces even partitioning, restricting
parallelism choices to divisors of the total number of devices. Next,
the Generator determines the number of pipeline stages within
each replica, again ensuring even partitioning. Finally, it assigns
cell-level data parallelism and applies Parallel Templates to generate task mappings. If a cell’s data parallelism degree is lower than
the number of assigned devices, intra-layer parallelism (e.g., tensor
or expert parallelism) is applied. For instance, if four devices are assigned to a cell with two replicas, each replica receives two devices,
and tensor parallelism is applied to parallelize the cell replica across
the two devices. Lastly, for each pair of adjacent cells, the Generator
inserts collective communication operations for synchronization
and tensor resharding. Now that various parallel schemes have been

16:

for 𝑟 in 0,..., len(LLM.block.cells): do
reshard = get_reshard_collective(cell_schemes, 𝑟 )
stage_schemes.append(cell_schemes, reshard)
parallel_schemes.append(stage_schemes)

generated for the target model, the logical devices can be mapped
to physical devices, producing executable parallel execution plans;
we discuss the physical device mapping in the following subsection.
3.2.3 Device Mapper. The Device Mapper takes the parallel schemes
and the device cluster configuration as input, and assigns logical
devices cluster to the physical device cluster, producing parallel
execution plans. While the parallel schemes are generated in a
top-down approach, the Device Mapper operates in a bottom-up
manner. Specifically, the logical devices are first mapped to physical
devices connected at the bottom level of the cluster, such as Level 1
in Figure 1; if the number of logical devices exceeds the available
physical devices at the current level, the mapping extends to the
next higher level to include additional physical devices. Since lowerlevel connections generally offer higher bandwidth (e.g., NVLink
in Level 1), the Device Mapper prioritizes mapping logical devices
assigned to the same cell, as fine-grained parallelism (e.g., tensor
parallelism) often incurs expensive collective communication (e.g.,
AllReduce). Next, the Device Mapper maps logical devices assigned
to the same pipeline stage, followed by those assigned to the same
model replica, progressing through increasingly coarse-grained
parallelisms. This bottom-up approach ensures that logical devices
with higher communication demands are mapped to lower-level
physical connections with greater bandwidth, while those with
lower communication overhead are placed at higher levels. Once
the mapping is completed, we obtain multiple parallel execution
plans, each describing a distinct strategy for parallelizing the input
LLM on the target cluster. Next, these plans are evaluated using the
Batching Module and the LLM Serving Simulator.

3.3

Batching Module

The Batching Module takes the parallel execution plans and a trace
of requests as inputs, and simulates LLM serving system using
iteration-level batching [45]. Request traces are often collected from
online services like Azure LLM Inference traces [37], and each
request comprises three key attributes: context length, generation
length, and arrival time. As mentioned in Section 2.3, iteration-level
batching greedily adds arriving requests to the processing batch
whenever memory permits. Therefore, the Batching Module tracks
5

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Lin et al.

Table 1: Detail of the request traces used for evaluation

memory usage and request arrival times to determine whether new
requests can be added to the processing batch. It maintains an active
request list that tracks requests that are in the processing batch and
the length of their generated tokens. When a request reaches its
generation length, it is removed from the batch, freeing memory
for new requests. In each iteration, one token is generated per
active request, and the active request list is sent to the LLM Serving
Simulator (Section 3.4) to estimate the execution time and energy
consumption of that iteration. Due to the greedy nature of iterationlevel batching, the Batching Module may add requests that exceed
memory capacity, as it does not pre-allocate enough memory for
the KV cache of generated tokens. In such cases, the most recently
added requests and their tokens are temporarily removed to free
memory for earlier requests to complete.

3.4

Context Lengths

Generation Lengths

# of requests

Summarization
Creation

2742.11±944.33

172.22±73.17

1188

306.82±81.03

1128.34±419.64

Chat

512

73.32±148.65

189.47±174.18

1024

operation-level profiling, measuring key transformer operations
such as multi-head attention and general matrix multiplication.
Since these operations are fundamental to transformer models, this
approach allows APEX to support various LLMs without requiring
per-model profiling. The profiling is performed across various context lengths, attention heads, hidden dimensions, etc. Additionally,
the profiler measures collective communication overheads, including AllReduce, ReduceScatter, etc., across different data transfer
sizes, device counts, and number of nodes. By covering a wide range
of computation and communication configurations, the profiling
results facilitate accurate estimation of execution time and energy
consumption across different LLMs, device clusters, and parallel
execution plans. Notably, profiling is a one-time cost when porting
to a new cluster and can be amortized across multiple simulations.

LLM Serving Simulator

The LLM Serving Simulator estimates the execution time and energy consumption for each iteration based on active requests from
the Batching Module and Profiling Results. The Profiling Results
provide execution times and energy consumptions for key operations such as multi-head attention under various configurations
(e.g., number of attention heads, feature dimensions). If a specific
data point is missing, the Simulator applies linear interpolation
between the nearest profiling data points. We discuss the profiling process in detail in the next subsection and focus here on the
Simulator’s execution process. The Simulator estimates the time to
process the requests in the active request list. For requests in prefill
stage, execution time is estimated by querying the profiling results
with the full context length, as the entire sequence is processed
in parallel. For requests in decode stage, only the current token
is processed, reducing the effective context length to one. If there
are 𝑛 decode requests, execution time is estimated using context
length 𝑛, since all decode requests (each with an effective context
length of one) are processed in parallel. The Simulator estimates
energy consumption in a similar fashion by querying the profiling
results for the energy consumed by each operation. To reduce simulation overhead, the Simulator leverages the repetitive structure of
LLMs by simulating only a single Transformer block, which is the
smallest set of non-repetitive cells of a LLM (Section 3.2.1). APEX
then extrapolates the results to estimate the execution time and
energy consumption of the full model. For example, the execution
time of the iteration is extrapolated by taking the maximum across
all pipeline stages, since the latency is determined by the slowest
pipeline stage. In contrast, energy consumption is computed as the
sum across all stages, as all devices contribute to energy usage. The
Simulator also tracks key LLM serving metrics such as time to first
token, time per output token, P95 latency, Model FLOPs Utilization,
and Model Bandwidth Utilization; these metrics allow APEX to
evaluate the parallel execution plans comprehensively and pick an
optimal plan based on a user’s desired metric(s).

3.5

Traces

4 Experimental Results
4.1 Experimental Setup
To evaluate APEX, we choose a broad range of LLMs and datasets
with distinct workloads. We discuss the setup details below.
Models: For evaluation, we choose four state-of-the-art LLMs:
Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct, Llama-3.1-405B-Instruct [12], Mistral-LargeInstruct (123B) [21], and Mixtral 8x22B-Instruct [22]; This covers
a myriad of LLMs in different sizes and also a Mixture-of-Expert
(MoE) model. While the models use half-precision (FP16) by default,
we also test cases where the model is quantized to FP8 format.
Datasets: We prepared three sets of request traces derived from
distinct datasets: a paper summarization dataset [9], a news abstract summarization dataset [13], and a conversational dataset,
LMSYS-Chat-1M [48]. These datasets represent three distinct workloads. The paper summarization [9] exemplifies a prefill-intensive
workload, which has a long context length and short generation
length. To create a generation-intensive workload with short context and long generation lengths, we modify the news abstract
summarization dataset [13] by appending the following prompt:
“Generate a long story using the provided abstract." This prompts the
LLM to produce a long story from a short abstract, resulting in a
generation-intensive workload. The LMSYS-Chat-1M [48] dataset
collects real-world conversations between users and LLMs. Most requests in this dataset feature short context and generation lengths,
representing a lightweight conversational workload. We randomly
subsampled between 512 and 1188 requests from each dataset to
produce our request traces. We refer to these traces as Summarization (paper summarization), Creation (news generation), and Chat
(LMSYS-Chat-1M) in the following sections. We assume a Poisson
distribution [10] for request arrival times. Details of the request
traces are listed in Table 1.
Hardware Platform and Serving Systems: We run APEX simulation using an Intel Xeon 6530 CPU and validated the simulation

Profiling Results

The profiling results are collected offline and used as system data
(Figure 2) during simulation. An Offline Profiler collects platformspecific performance data, which is used by the LLM Serving Simulator to estimate execution time and energy consumption. Instead of profiling each LLM exhaustively, the Profiler performs
6

APEX: An Extensible and Dynamism-Aware Simulator for Automated Parallel Execution in LLM Serving

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Table 2: APEX simulation results: End-to-end latency (seconds). APEX demonstrates its ability to identify optimal parallel
execution plans, achieving superior serving performance compared to heuristic baseline plans.
Traces

Model
Llama-3.1-70B

Summarization

Mistral-Large
Mixtral-8x22B
Llama-3.1-70B

Creation

Mistral-Large
Mixtral-8x22B
Llama-3.1-70B

Chat

Mistral-Large
Mixtral-8x22B

Arrival Rate

Baseline

Feasible Optimal

APEX Optimal

0.25
0.5
0.25
0.5
0.25
0.5
0.25
0.5
0.25
0.5
0.25
0.5
0.25
0.5
0.25
0.5
0.25
0.5

1998.82 (1×)
1565.11 (1×)
2210.05 (1×)
1683.00 (1×)
2005.06 (1×)
1618.54 (1×)
4027.70 (1×)
1869.45 (1×)
3561.55 (1×)
2560.70 (1×)
2645.79 (1×)
1393.19 (1×)
1622.48 (1×)
1344.42 (1×)
2041.91 (1×)
1594.74 (1×)
1938.26 (1×)
1507.11 (1×)

1340.99 (1.49×)
1225.38 (1.28×)
1624.17 (1.36×)
1483.38 (1.14×)
1753.79 (1.14×)
1473.79 (1.10×)
2301.54 (1.75×)
1639.87 (1.14×)
2268.50 (1.57×)
2016.30 (1.27×)
2593.91 (1.02×)
1386.16 (1.01×)
1118.85 (1.45×)
1021.09 (1.32×)
1423.44 (1.43×)
1356.52 (1.18×)
1658.22 (1.17×)
1380.34 (1.09×)

1175.09 (1.70×)
1140.19 (1.37×)
1514.19 (1.46×)
1420.98 (1.18×)
859.83 (2.33×)
856.84 (1.89×)
1945.75 (2.07×)
1133.05 (1.65×)
1496.45 (2.38×)
1313.18 (1.95×)
1496.45 (1.77×)
1035.62 (1.35×)
824.43 (1.97×)
808.96 (1.66×)
1182.75 (1.73×)
1102.20 (1.45×)
575.12 (3.37×)
567.53 (2.66×)

results against the actual performance of LLM serving on a GPU
cluster. We deployed vLLM [24] v0.6.0 and SGLang v0.4.5 [49] to
configure LLM online servers on three GPU clusters: (1) a Singlenode H100 cluster equipped with 8 Nvidia H100 SXM GPUs, each
with 80 GB of GPU memory, (2) a Multi-node H100 Cluster consisting of two nodes, each with 8 Nvidia H100 SXM GPUs, and (3) a
H200 Cluster (single-node) that has 8 Nvidia H200 SXM GPUs.

4.2

LLMs. We also conduct experiments using two different arrival
rates for the requests, assuming a Poisson distribution [10]. To explore different quantization formats, we quantize the Mistral-Large
model using FP8 for the KV cache, as well as the weights and activations (i.e., W8A8). APEX identifies optimal parallel execution plans
for both dense and sparse LLMs (i.e, MoE models), and the Feasible
Optimal plans consistently deliver performance improvement over
the baseline, achieving up to 1.75× speedup in terms of end-to-end
serving latency. Furthermore, assuming cell-level data parallelism
is supported, APEX Optimal Plans achieve speedups of up to 3.37×.
In this experiment, we demonstrate APEX is able to identify an
optimal parallel execution plan that improves LLM serving latency
under various LLMs and request traces. The identified optimal plans
consist of various combinations of data, pipeline, and tensor parallelism, effectively balancing the trade-offs of various factors (e.g.,
compute, memory, network traffic) to outperform the baseline plan,
which only relies on tensor parallelism. While the optimal plans
are different from task to task, we observe that incorporating data
parallelism (DP) often yields performance benefits. Many of the
identified optimal plans set the degree of DP to 2. Existing LLM
serving systems often overlook DP, assuming it is prohibitively
memory-intensive. Instead, our results demonstrate that trading
memory efficiency for reduced communication overhead can lead
to performance improvements. We also observe that the Feasible
Optimal plan of Mixtral-8x22B shows only marginal improvement
over the baseline on the Creation trace. This is due to the dominating role of memory utilization in this setup, leaving fewer trade-offs
available for performance improvement. Specifically, Mixtral-8x22B,
with its 141B parameters, heavily utilizes memory resources, and
the Creation traces’s generation-intensive nature further increases
memory demands due to extensive KV caching. Under these conditions, the baseline plan, which adopts pure tensor parallelism,
performs well owing to its high memory efficiency. Nevertheless,
the APEX Optimal plan still manages to deliver a 1.77× speedup by
enabling cell-level DP.

Evaluation of APEX’s prediction

In this experiment, we address the following research question:
Can APEX improve LLM serving performance by identifying
optimal parallel execution plans? For evaluation, we design
multiple tasks, with each task comprising an LLM, request trace,
and arrival rate. We run APEX simulation for each task and compare
the end-to-end serving latency of the following three plans:
1. Baseline plan: We follow the commonly-used heuristics [34, 43],
which applies tensor parallelism within the same node and pipeline
parallelism across nodes.
2. APEX Optimal plan: APEX identifies an optimal plan for each
task. However, APEX’s search space extends beyond the capabilities
of current LLM serving systems, including advanced features like
cell-level data parallelism. As a result, an execution plan may not be
fully supported by existing LLM serving systems. Still, we include
the results to showcase the potential performance gains that can be
achieved by supporting a broader range of parallelism techniques.
3. Feasible Optimal plan: This is the optimal plan identified by
APEX under the constraint that only parallelism techniques supported by current LLM serving systems are used. Due to the reduced
search space, the feasible optimal plan may achieve lower performance compared to the unconstrained APEX Optimal plan.
4.2.1 Single-Node H100 cluster. We first evaluate APEX on a singlenode cluster with 8 H100 GPUs and show the experimental results
in Table 2. We experiment with the three request traces and three
7

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Lin et al.

Table 3: End-to-End latency (sec.). APEX identifies optimal
execution plans for different clusters
Model & Cluster

Traces

Baseline

APEX Optimal

Llama-3.1-405B
(Multi-Node H100)

Summ.
Creation
Chat

4077.88
2314.25
2645.89

2519.12 (1.62×)
1229.14 (1.88×)
1710.10 (1.55×)

Llama-3.1-70B
(H200)

Summ.
Creation
Chat

1433.21
1128.66
1189.00

897.95 (1.60×)
667.85 (1.69×)
536.74 (2.22×)

Mistral-Large
(H200)

Summ.
Creation
Chat

1595.24
1389.19
1515.41

1174.79 (1.36×)
776.08 (1.79×)
961.59 (1.56×)

Mixtral-8x22B
(H200)

Summ.
Creation
Chat

1540.42
1380.75
1380.76

706.06 (2.18×)
993.34 (1.39×)
500.32 (2.76×)

Table 4: APEX identifies plans optimized toward energy
Traces

Exe. Plans
(GPU Freq., GHz)

Energy
(KJ)

TTFT
(ms)

TPOT
(ms)

Summ.

Latency opt. (2.0)
Energy opt. (2.0)
Energy opt. (0.8)

4.095
3.293
2.265

788.67
992.69
1485.94

32.06
26.89
33.62

Creation

Latency opt. (2.0)
Energy opt. (2.0)
Energy opt. (0.8)

8.388
8.277
5.016

44.67
54.59
75.70

18.83
20.63
34.59

generally yield better energy efficiency than the baseline plans due
to shorter runtime. However, latency-optimal plans are not necessarily energy-optimal. We observe that energy efficiency varies
across operations of different input sizes, and some operations consume disproportionately more energy; investigating the underlying
cause of this phenomenon is beyond the scope of this work, and we
instead focus on leveraging the collected profiling results to identify energy-efficient execution plans. APEX evaluates the energy
consumption across various parallel execution plans and identifies
the energy-optimal plan. Reported in the second rows of Table 4,
energy-optimal plans reduce energy consumption by up to 19%
compared to latency-optimal plans. For systems with more relaxed
SLOs, service providers may further reduce energy consumption
by lowering GPU frequency. In the third rows of Table 4, APEX
identifies optimal plans under 0.8 GHz of GPU frequency, reducing
energy consumption by 45% and 41% on the Summarization and
Creation traces, respectively. While this results in increased TTFT
(up to 1.9×) and TPOT (up to 1.8×), such increases may still be
acceptable in practice, for instance, when the TPOT requirement is
50 ms. These results show that APEX enables service providers to
make informed trade-offs between latency and energy efficiency.

4.2.2 Multi-Node H100 Cluster. Next, we evaluate APEX on a twonode cluster, each node contains 8 NVIDIA H100 SXM GPUs, identical to the setup in Section 4.2.1. We use Llama-3.1-405B, one of
the largest publicly available LLMs for evaluation on this cluster.
Results are presented in the first row of Table 3. Due to space constraints, we report only the Baseline Plan and APEX Optimal Plan
under an arrival rate of 0.5. Experimental results show that APEX
consistently identifies execution plans that outperform the baseline,
achieving speedups ranging from 1.55× to 1.88×. These findings
demonstrate APEX’s ability to scale effectively to multi-node clusters and extremely large models, continuing to identify performant
execution plans under increased system complexity.
4.2.3 H200 Cluster. We also evaluate APEX on a cluster with 8
NVIDIA H200 GPUs. Compared to the H100 (80 GB HBM), the H200
offers the same compute and peak performance but with increased
memory capacity (141 GB HBM). This expanded memory enables
the H200 cluster to explore a larger design space, allowing for more
flexible trade-offs between parallelism strategies. As shown in last
three rows of Table 3, APEX finds simulation plans that lead to up
to 2.76× speedup compared to the baseline plan. Notably, APEX
recommends different optimal plans for the H200 and H100 clusters
under the same experimental setup. For instance, when serving the
Summarization trace with the Mistral-Large model, APEX suggests
2-way data parallelism for H100, and 4-way data parallelism plan
for H200. While the H200 plan incurs higher memory overhead, it
reduces communication overhead, making the trade-off favorable
due to the H200’s larger memory capacity.

4.3

Evaluation of Simulation Fidelity

In this experiment, we address the following research question:
Can APEX provide high-fidelity simulation for LLM serving?
While we demonstrate in Section 4.2 that APEX can identify optimal
parallel execution plans that enhance LLM serving performance, it
is also essential to verify the fidelity of its simulation results. We
evaluate the simulation fidelity from two perspectives. First, under
a fixed number of devices, we assess whether APEX can accurately
predict the performance improvement of an optimal plan compared
to a baseline plan. Second, for a given execution plan, we evaluate
whether APEX can reliably predict performance improvements
when scaling across different numbers of devices. We show the
experimental results in Figure 6 and Figure 7.
For the first experiment set, we compare the predicted speedup
of Feasible Optimal plans with the actual speedup achieved on the
device cluster (Figure 6). We use vLLM [24] to serve Llama-3.170B and Mistral-Large, and use SGLang [49] for Mixtral-8x22B as
vLLM does not support expert parallelism (EP) at the time of our
experiments. APEX achieves accurate predictions, with an average
relative error of 10.7%. The main discrepancy lies in the predictions for Mixtral-8x22B. APEX estimates that applying EP would
outperform tensor parallelism (TP) due to the lower overhead of

4.2.4 Optimize Towards Energy Efficiency. For service providers,
latency is not the only metric that matters. Rather than minimizing inference time at all costs, providers are typically required to
meet specific service-level objectives (SLOs), allowing room to optimize other metrics as long as the SLOs are satisfied. One critical
metric is energy consumption, which directly impacts both operational costs and carbon emissions. APEX supports optimizing
for energy consumption by profiling not only execution time but
also the energy usage of operations. We demonstrate this capability in Table 4, which presents results for serving a Llama-3.1-70B
model on a cluster with 8 H100 GPUs. The first rows report latencyoptimal plans (i.e., the APEX Optimal Plans in Table 2), which
8

APEX: An Extensible and Dynamism-Aware Simulator for Automated Parallel Execution in LLM Serving

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

5%

2

9%
3%

1.6

6%

5%

Sim. time (sec.)

Speedup over the baseline

2.4

8%
28%

1.2

17%

15%

0.8
0.4

Summ. Creation Chat

Summ. Creation Chat

Summ. Creation Chat

Llama-3.1-70B

Mistral-Large

Mixtral-8x22B

Predicted Speedup (APEX)

4.4

Actual Speedup

2

4

8
APEX

Llama-Creation

30

10
0
2

4

8

4

8

Mistral-Creation

40
30
20

50
40
30
20
10
0

Actual

Mistral-Summarization

2

Actual
50
40
30
20
10
0

20

40
30
20
10
0

50
40
30
20
10
0

Actual

0

APEX

10

APEX

20

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Actual

Llama-Summarization

Actual

APEX

10
16

32B
1 node
2 GPUs

70B
1 node
4 GPUs

123B
1 node
8 GPUs

32

64

128

405B
4 nodes
32 GPUs
256

512

1120B
8 nodes
64 GPUs
1024

Model size (biliion parameters)

10
0
2

4

Evaluation of Efficiency

We evaluate the efficiency of APEX by comparing the APEX simulation time with the actual execution time on the device cluster.
Evaluating all parallel execution plans across the setups in Table
2 (i.e., different models, traces, arrival rates) takes approximately
160 hours on 8 H100 GPUs. In contrast, the same evaluation is completed in less than 2.5 hours using APEX on a CPU, making it 71×
faster than the actual deployment. From a cost perspective, running the actual implementation would cost approximately $8,889
(based on the Azure NC40ads H100 cluster pricing), whereas the
APEX simulation costs only $7.20 (assuming an Azure D64s v6 CPU
node). This translates to a 1234.5× cost reduction, demonstrating
the significant time efficiency and cost-effectiveness of APEX. Obtaining the operation-level profiling results to set up APEX takes
approximately 40 GPU hours. Yet, this is a one-time cost that can
be amortized for the same type of device cluster.
We also evaluate the simulation overhead when scaling to larger
LLMs on larger device clusters. We use the following example
models: Qwen2.5-32B, Llama-3.1-70B, Mistral-Large, and Llama3.1-405B. We synthesize a trillion-scale model by scaling the Llama3.1-70B model 16 times; this is done by modifying values in the
LLM configuration file [18]. As shown in Figure 8, APEX demonstrates high scalability, maintaining a similar simulation overhead
when scaling from a 32B to a trillion-scale model. This efficiency is
achieved by leveraging the canonical representation of Transformer
IR (Section 3.2.1) and the repetitive structure of the transformer
architecture to reduce the design space. This scalability highlights
APEX’s potential for future applications, as model sizes continue
to grow and the cost of actual deployment become more expensive.

Figure 6: Speedup predicted by APEX vs. actual speedup
achieved. APEX accurately predicts the speedup of adopting an optimal execution plan over the baseline plan.

APEX

100

Figure 8: APEX maintains similar simulation overhead when
scaling from billion-scale to trillion-scale models

0

30

1000

8

Figure 7: APEX accurately predicts the scalability trend
across varying numbers of GPUs, as measured by TPOT (ms)

All-to-All communication in EP, compared to the AllReduce operations required in TP. However, when serving with SGLang, we
observe that TP consistently outperforms EP across experiments.
A potential reason is that the current implementation of EP may
not be as well-optimized as TP, leading to higher-than-expected
overheads during execution.
For the second experiment set, we evaluate the time per output
token (TPOT) across different numbers of GPUs using tensor parallelism. We show the results in Figure 7. The APEX prediction results
are shown as green solid lines, while the actual results are represented by red dotted lines. The high similarity between the two
lines across all cases demonstrates that APEX accurately captures
the scalability trend when scaling from 2 GPUs to 8 GPUs across
various models and request traces. The estimated TPOT (ms) of
APEX is plotted on the left-hand Y-axis, and the actual TPOT (ms) is
plotted on the right-hand Y-axis. The actual measured TPOT is consistently higher than the predicted value, as evident from the larger
values on the right-hand Y-axis compared to the left-hand Y-axis.
This is because APEX focuses on the overhead of key operations,
such as attention and feedforward, while omitting the overhead
of other operations. Nevertheless, APEX accurately captures the
relative performance differences between various parallel execution
plans and degrees of parallelism, as demonstrated in Figure 6 and 7.
This capability enables APEX to effectively evaluate and compare
different execution plans, thereby identifying an optimal parallel
execution plan for LLM serving.

4.5

Evaluation of Extensibility

While APEX supports a wide range of models, devices, etc., the
simulator may still become outdated as new advancements emerge.
To address this, APEX is designed for extensibility, enabling easy
adaptation to support the latest developments. We evaluate APEX’s
extensibility by measuring the overheads to implement a new feature. We use two metrics: (1) programming overhead, measured in
lines of code required for a feature extension, and (2) implementation time overhead, measured in hours, including time to write and
execute the code or scripts. We reported the overhead of various
types of extensions in Table 5 and discuss the details below.
Extending to New Models APEX can effortlessly support a new
LLM without additional programming or implementation time by
requiring only a configuration file [18] of the model. However, for
LLMs containing unknown transformer cells (Section 3.2.1), such
as a novel feedforward network, additional effort is needed. The
primary work involves implementing the Parallel Template (Section
9

Lin et al.

Implementation Time
Overhead (Hour)

LLM
LLM (w/ unknown cells)
Device cluster
Batching Mechansim
Parallelism

0
50 - 150
∼20
∼100
50 - 200

∼0
1-2
6-8
1-2
1-2

2000

16
14

1500
1000

12

500
0

10
4
8
12 16 20
Max. batch size constraint

E2E Latency
TPOT
2500
2000
1500
1000
500

Mistral-Large

0

20
18
16
14
12
10

4
8
12
16
20
Max. batch size constraint

Figure 9: APEX can simulate with various maximum batch
size constraints and suggest adjustments to meet SLOs.

3.2.2) for the new cells. For evaluation, we measured the effort to
support SwiGLU cells [40] used in the Llama-3.1 models.
Extending to New Device Cluster APEX can easily adapt to new
device clusters by providing the device name, memory capacity,
and interconnection network (e.g., NVLink, PCIe). We evaluated the
effort required to support a new GPU model. The implementation
time overhead mainly involves running profiling scripts, which take
6 to 8 hours. While extending to new devices requires a relatively
long profiling time, this is a one-time effort that can be amortized.
Extending to New Batching Mechanism APEX also supports
new batching mechanisms. While this is not as straightforward as
supporting a new model or a new device cluster, it can be done
by modifying the Batching Module (Section 3.3). APEX adopts
contiguous batching [24, 49] by default. We evaluate the overhead
of extending to support a Sarathi-Serve-style [2] batching, which
performs chunked prefill to better interleave prefill and decode
requests. This extension is done by adding a new variable, chunk
size, to the Batching Module and a counter to each request to ensure
all prefill chunks are completed before moving to the decode stage.
Extending to New Parallelism The overhead of extending to
new parallelisms depends on the specific parallelism being added.
For example, supporting a new intra-layer parallelism is analogous
to supporting a new transformer cell, as it requires adding a new
Parallel Template. Similarly, Fully Sharded Data Parallelism (FSDP)
can be integrated into APEX by extending the existing DP implementation, incorporating additional collective communications and
adjusting memory usage for the sharded model storage.

4.6

Llama-3.1-70B

E2E latency (sec.)

Programming Overhead
(Lines of Code)

E2E latency (sec.)

Extension Type

2500

TPOT (ms)

Table 5: Evaluating the overhead of extending APEX

TPOT (ms)

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

this trade-off, as shown in Figure 9, where setting the batch size
constraint to 4 leads to degraded end-to-end serving latency.

5

Related Work

LLM Serving Systems: With the emergence of LLMs, numerous
LLM serving systems have been proposed [2, 24, 36, 37, 45, 52]. Each
system introduces innovations to address key challenges in LLM
serving. Orca [45] introduced iteration-level batching, significantly
improving serving throughput. This technique has since become a
standard in LLM serving systems. vLLM [24] proposed PagedAttention, an efficient method to manage KV cache memory usage,
enabling more concurrent request batching. DistServe and Splitwise [37, 52] disaggregate the prefill and decode stages, processing
stage separately (e.g., using different clusters, applying different
optimizations) for better serving performance. While these systems
allow users to manually specify the degree of parallelisms, they do
not provide guidance on determining these configurations. APEX
complements these works by automatically identifying optimal
plans, which can be used to configure these serving systems.
Configuration Searching Tools: LLM-Pilot [25] proposes a predictive model to help users select the most cost-effective hardware
for serving LLMs. DynamoLLM [42] proposes a framework to automatically reconfigure the cluster to optimize the energy efficiency
of LLM serving. However, both LLM-Pilot and DynamoLLM only
consider tensor parallelism and can be further enhanced by incorporating hybrid parallelisms, as supported by APEX. Calculon
[20] introduces a performance model to identify optimal execution
plans for LLM training, while vTrain [4] and ASTRA-sim [39] adopt
simulator-based approaches to achieve the same goal. Nevertheless, these solutions are tailored to training workloads and do not
address the unique challenges of LLM serving, particularly the dynamism introduced by iteration-level batching. LLMServingSim [7]
and Vidur [1] are the few frameworks designed for LLM serving.
Yet, LLMServingSim primarily focuses on NPUs and Processing-inMemory architectures, and it relies on their corresponding hardware simulators to estimate execution times. In contrast, APEX
utilizes operation-level profiling data to estimate execution time
and does not rely on other hardware simulators. Vidur requires a
model onboarding step before simulation, which involves parsing
the operations within the target LLM and profiling them. APEX
bypasses this requirement by capturing the key operations of LLMs
and utilizing pre-collected profiling results, allowing simulations
to start immediately with amortized profiling costs. In addition,
neither LLMServingSim nor Vidur supports energy-aware optimization, a critical requirement for LLM service providers. They
also lack support for emerging LLM serving needs, such as Mixtureof-Experts models, quantization formats, and multi-node clusters.

Beyond Identifying Optimal Execution Plan

The high simulation fidelity makes APEX applicable to other use
cases beyond identifing optimal execution plans. For example, APEX
can help service providers meet various service-level objectives
(SLOs), such as maintaining a target time per output token (TPOT).
A common strategy to meet latency requirements is to adjust the
batch size by setting a maximum batch size constraint. APEX begins
by simulating a subset of requests to determine an upper bound for
the batch size, denoted as 𝑚. It then divides this upper bound into
𝑛 segments and simulates the request traces with various batch
𝑛×𝑚
size constraints, ranging from 1×𝑚
𝑛 to 𝑛 , where 𝑛 is determined
heuristically. Figure 9 illustrates two examples using the Llama3.1-70B and Mistral-Large models on the Creation trace. Suppose a
service provider aims to reduce TPOT to meet an SLO. Based on
APEX’s results, they can estimate the required adjustment to the
batch size constraint. For instance, reducing the maximum batch
size from 16 to 8 yields a TPOT improvement of 18% for Llama
and 14% for Mistral. However, overly restricting the maximum
batch size may negatively affect performance; APEX also captures
10

APEX: An Extensible and Dynamism-Aware Simulator for Automated Parallel Execution in LLM Serving

6

Conlusion

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan,
Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Frank
Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Graeme Nail,
Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang, Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann,
Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes,
Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock,
Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie
Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua
Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Kartikeya Upasani,
Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika
Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens
van der Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish
Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas,
Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur, Mike Lewis,
Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Olivier Duchenne, Onur Çelebi,
Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal
Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing
He, Qingxiao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel,
Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva,
Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean
Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath
Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin
Gururangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha,
Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher, Todor Mihaylov, Tong
Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei
Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong
Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue
Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe
Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aaron Grattafiori, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam
Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon,
Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alex Vaughan, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein,
Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado,
Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit
Ramchandani, Annie Franco, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley
Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh Yazdan, Beau James, Ben
Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi
Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon
Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu,
Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Damon
Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, Danny Wyatt, David Adkins, David
Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Didem Foss,
Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine
Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian,
Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Kanayet, Frank
Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee,
Gil Halpern, Govind Thattai, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang,
Guna Lakshminarayanan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen
Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter
Goldman, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai
Gat, Jake Weissman, James Geboski, James Kohli, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste
Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein,
Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill,
Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kai
Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Karthik Prasad, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun
Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kun
Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kushal Lakhotia, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg,
Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu,
Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish
Bhatt, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie,
Matthias Reso, Maxim Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally,
Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov,
Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam,
Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo,
Nicolas Usunier, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong, Ning Zhang, Norman
Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent,
Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre
Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian

In this work, we developed APEX, an extensible and dynamismaware simulator for LLM serving. We evaluated APEX across various LLMs and distinct workloads, demonstrating its high-fidelity
simulation with only a 10.7% relative error on the average. APEX
successfully identified latency-optimal execution plans that achieve
up to 3.37× speedup compared to heuristic plans, and also energyoptimal plans that reduce energy consumption by up to 45% compared to latency-optimal plans. The simulation proved highly efficient, providing a 71× speedup and 1234× greater cost-effectiveness
than deployment on actual hardware. APEX maintained a similar
simulation overhead when scaling from billion-scale to trillion-scale
models. While APEX already supports a broad range of LLMs, we
further demonstrated its ease of extensibility to accommodate new
models, device clusters, batching algorithms, and parallelisms. In
the future, we plan to extend APEX to support multimodal LLMs,
which will involve incorporating parallel execution plans for encoders handling modalities such as vision and audio.

References
[1] Amey Agrawal, Nitin Kedia, Jayashree Mohan, Ashish Panwar, Nipun Kwatra,
Bhargav Gulavani, Ramachandran Ramjee, and Alexey Tumanov. 2024. VIDUR:
A LARGE-SCALE SIMULATION FRAMEWORK FOR LLM INFERENCE. In Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems.
[2] Amey Agrawal, Nitin Kedia, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun Kwatra,
Bhargav S Gulavani, Alexey Tumanov, and Ramachandran Ramjee. 2024. Taming
Throughput-Latency Tradeoff in LLM Inference with Sarathi-Serve. Proceedings
of 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation,
2024, Santa Clara (2024).
[3] Joshua Ainslie, James Lee-Thorp, Michiel de Jong, Yury Zemlyanskiy, Federico
Lebrón, and Sumit Sanghai. 2023. GQA: Training Generalized Multi-Query
Transformer Models from Multi-Head Checkpoints. arXiv:2305.13245 [cs.CL]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.13245
[4] Jehyeon Bang, Yujeong Choi, Myeongwoo Kim, Yongdeok Kim, and Minsoo
Rhu. 2024. vTrain: A Simulation Framework for Evaluating Cost-effective and
Compute-optimal Large Language Model Training. In 57th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO).
[5] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan,
Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan,
Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter,
Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin
Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners.
arXiv:2005.14165 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165
[6] Weilin Cai, Juyong Jiang, Fan Wang, Jing Tang, Sunghun Kim, and Jiayi Huang.
2024. A survey on mixture of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.06204 (2024).
[7] Jaehong Cho, Minsu Kim, Hyunmin Choi, Guseul Heo, and Jongse Park. 2024.
LLMServingSim: A HW/SW Co-Simulation Infrastructure for LLM Inference
Serving at Scale. arXiv:2408.05499 [cs.DC]
[8] Jack Choquette. 2023. NVIDIA Hopper H100 GPU: Scaling Performance. IEEE
Micro (2023).
[9] Arman Cohan, Franck Dernoncourt, Doo Soon Kim, Trung Bui, Seokhwan Kim,
Walter Chang, and Nazli Goharian. 2018. A Discourse-Aware Attention Model
for Abstractive Summarization of Long Documents. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers).
[10] Prem C Consul and Gaurav C Jain. 1973. A generalization of the Poisson distribution. Technometrics 15, 4 (1973), 791–799.
[11] Jiangfei Duan, Xiuhong Li, Ping Xu, Xingcheng Zhang, Shengen Yan, Yun Liang,
and Dahua Lin. 2024. Proteus: Simulating the Performance of Distributed DNN
Training . IEEE Transactions on Parallel & Distributed Systems (2024).
[12] Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela
Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien
Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh
Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra,
Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne
Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song,
11

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

Lin et al.

[27] Baolin Li, Yankai Jiang, Vijay Gadepally, and Devesh Tiwari. 2024. LLM Inference
Serving: Survey of Recent Advances and Opportunities. arXiv:2407.12391 [cs.DC]
[28] Shen Li, Yanli Zhao, Rohan Varma, Omkar Salpekar, Pieter Noordhuis, Teng Li,
Adam Paszke, Jeff Smith, Brian Vaughan, Pritam Damania, and Soumith Chintala.
2020. PyTorch distributed: experiences on accelerating data parallel training.
Proc. VLDB Endow. (2020).
[29] Ji Lin, Jiaming Tang, Haotian Tang, Shang Yang, Wei-Ming Chen, Wei-Chen
Wang, Guangxuan Xiao, Xingyu Dang, Chuang Gan, and Song Han. 2024. AWQ:
Activation-aware Weight Quantization for On-Device LLM Compression and
Acceleration. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems (2024).
[30] Hao Liu, Matei Zaharia, and Pieter Abbeel. 2023. Ring Attention with Blockwise
Transformers for Near-Infinite Context. arXiv:2310.01889 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.
org/abs/2310.01889
[31] Peini Liu and Jordi Guitart. 2022. Performance characterization of containerization for HPC workloads on InfiniBand clusters: an empirical study. Cluster
Computing (2022).
[32] Mary M Lucas, Justin Yang, Jon K Pomeroy, and Christopher C Yang. 2024.
Reasoning with large language models for medical question answering. Journal
of the American Medical Informatics Association (2024).
[33] Xupeng Miao, Gabriele Oliaro, Zhihao Zhang, Xinhao Cheng, Hongyi Jin, Tianqi
Chen, and Zhihao Jia. 2023. Towards Efficient Generative Large Language Model
Serving: A Survey from Algorithms to Systems. arXiv:2312.15234 [cs.LG] https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2312.15234
[34] Xupeng Miao, Gabriele Oliaro, Zhihao Zhang, Xinhao Cheng, Zeyu Wang,
Zhengxin Zhang, Rae Ying Yee Wong, Alan Zhu, Lijie Yang, Xiaoxiang Shi,
Chunan Shi, Zhuoming Chen, Daiyaan Arfeen, Reyna Abhyankar, and Zhihao
Jia. 2024. SpecInfer: Accelerating Large Language Model Serving with Treebased Speculative Inference and Verification. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, Volume 3.
[35] Deepak Narayanan, Aaron Harlap, Amar Phanishayee, Vivek Seshadri, Nikhil R.
Devanur, Gregory R. Ganger, Phillip B. Gibbons, and Matei Zaharia. 2019.
PipeDream: generalized pipeline parallelism for DNN training. In Proceedings of
the 27th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles.
[36] NVIDIA. 2024. TensorRT-LLM [Online]. https://nvidia.github.io/TensorRTLLM/overview.html. Accessed: 2024-11-13.
[37] Pratyush Patel, Esha Choukse, Chaojie Zhang, Aashaka Shah, Inigo Goiri, Saeed
Maleki, and Ricardo Bianchini. 2024. Splitwise: Efficient Generative LLM Inference Using Phase Splitting . In 2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA).
[38] Samyam Rajbhandari, Conglong Li, Zhewei Yao, Minjia Zhang, Reza Yazdani
Aminabadi, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Jeff Rasley, and Yuxiong He. 2022. DeepSpeedMoE: Advancing Mixture-of-Experts Inference and Training to Power NextGeneration AI Scale. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
Learning.
[39] Saeed Rashidi, Srinivas Sridharan, Sudarshan Srinivasan, and Tushar Krishna.
2020. ASTRA-SIM: Enabling SW/HW Co-Design Exploration for Distributed
DL Training Platforms. In 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Performance
Analysis of Systems and Software (ISPASS). 81–92.
GLU Variants Improve Transformer.
[40] Noam Shazeer. 2020.
arXiv:2002.05202 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05202
[41] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper,
and Bryan Catanzaro. 2020. Megatron-LM: Training Multi-Billion Parameter
Language Models Using Model Parallelism. arXiv:1909.08053 [cs.CL]
[42] Jovan Stojkovic, Chaojie Zhang, Inigo Goiri, Josep Torrellas, and Esha Choukse.
2025. DynamoLLM: Designing LLM Inference Clusters for Performance and
Energy Efficiency . In 2025 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance
Computer Architecture (HPCA).
[43] vLLM. v0.6.0. Distributed Inference and Serving [Online]. https://docs.vllm.ai/
en/v0.6.0/serving/distributed_serving.html. Accessed: 2024-11-12.
[44] Qi Wang, Jindong Li, Shiqi Wang, Qianli Xing, Runliang Niu, He Kong,
Rui Li, Guodong Long, Yi Chang, and Chengqi Zhang. 2024. Towards
Next-Generation LLM-based Recommender Systems: A Survey and Beyond.
arXiv:2410.19744 [cs.IR]
[45] Gyeong-In Yu, Joo Seong Jeong, Geon-Woo Kim, Soojeong Kim, and ByungGon Chun. 2022. Orca: A Distributed Serving System for Transformer-Based
Generative Models. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI 22).
[46] Geoffrey X. Yu, Yubo Gao, Pavel Golikov, and Gennady Pekhimenko. 2021. Habitat: A Runtime-Based Computational Performance Predictor for Deep Neural
Network Training. In 2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC
21).
[47] Hanyu Zhao, Zhenhua Han, Zhi Yang, Quanlu Zhang, Fan Yang, Lidong Zhou,
Mao Yang, Francis C.M. Lau, Yuqi Wang, Yifan Xiong, and Bin Wang. 2020.
HiveD: Sharing a GPU Cluster for Deep Learning with Guarantees. In 14th
USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20).
[48] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Tianle Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Eric P. Xing, Joseph E. Gonzalez,

Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu
Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang,
Rohan Maheswari, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta,
Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh
Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay,
Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang,
Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan
Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian,
Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo
Kohler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy
Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai
Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vítor Albiero, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad
Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang,
Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaofang Wang,
Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xide Xia, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yanjun Chen, Ye
Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam,
Yu, Wang, Yuchen Hao, Yundi Qian, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef
Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, and Zhiwei Zhao. 2024. The Llama 3
Herd of Models. arXiv:2407.21783 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783
[13] Alexander Fabbri, Irene Li, Tianwei She, Suyi Li, and Dragomir Radev. 2019. MultiNews: A Large-Scale Multi-Document Summarization Dataset and Abstractive
Hierarchical Model. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics.
[14] Sarah Fakhoury, Aaditya Naik, Georgios Sakkas, Saikat Chakraborty, and Shuvendu K. Lahiri. 2024. LLM-Based Test-Driven Interactive Code Generation:
User Study and Empirical Evaluation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
(2024).
[15] Karol Gregor, Ivo Danihelka, Andriy Mnih, Charles Blundell, and Daan Wierstra.
2014. Deep autoregressive networks. In International Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR, 1242–1250.
[16] Coleman Hooper, Sehoon Kim, Hiva Mohammadzadeh, Michael W Mahoney,
Yakun Sophia Shao, Kurt Keutzer, and Amir Gholami. 2024. Kvquant: Towards 10
million context length llm inference with kv cache quantization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.18079 (2024).
[17] Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Dehao Chen, Mia
Chen, HyoukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam, Quoc V Le, Yonghui Wu, and zhifeng
Chen. 2019. GPipe: Efficient Training of Giant Neural Networks using Pipeline
Parallelism. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
[18] Huggingface. 2025. Configuration. https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/en/
main_classes/configuration.
[19] Intel. 2024. Intel Gaudi 3 AI Accelerator. In Technical White Paper.
[20] Mikhail Isaev, Nic Mcdonald, Larry Dennison, and Richard Vuduc. 2023. Calculon:
a methodology and tool for high-level co-design of systems and large language
models. In Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis.
[21] Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel,
Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux,
Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix,
and William El Sayed. 2023. Mistral 7B. arXiv:2310.06825 [cs.CL] https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2310.06825
[22] Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche
Savary, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou
Hanna, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Bour, Guillaume Lample,
Lélio Renard Lavaud, Lucile Saulnier, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Sandeep
Subramanian, Sophia Yang, Szymon Antoniak, Teven Le Scao, Théophile Gervet,
Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. 2024.
Mixtral of Experts. arXiv:2401.04088 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.04088
[23] Norm Jouppi, George Kurian, Sheng Li, Peter Ma, Rahul Nagarajan, Lifeng Nai,
Nishant Patil, Suvinay Subramanian, Andy Swing, Brian Towles, Clifford Young,
Xiang Zhou, Zongwei Zhou, and David A Patterson. 2023. TPU v4: An Optically
Reconfigurable Supercomputer for Machine Learning with Hardware Support
for Embeddings. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual International Symposium on
Computer Architecture.
[24] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng,
Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Efficient
Memory Management for Large Language Model Serving with PagedAttention.
In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles.
[25] Malgorzata Lazuka, Andreea Anghel, and Thomas Parnell. 2024. LLM-Pilot:
Characterize and Optimize Performance of your LLM Inference Services. In
Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing,
Networking, Storage, and Analysis.
[26] Ang Li, Shuaiwen Leon Song, Jieyang Chen, Jiajia Li, Xu Liu, Nathan R. Tallent,
and Kevin J. Barker. 2020. Evaluating Modern GPU Interconnect: PCIe, NVLink,
NV-SLI, NVSwitch and GPUDirect. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed
Systems (2020).
12

APEX: An Extensible and Dynamism-Aware Simulator for Automated Parallel Execution in LLM Serving

Conference acronym ’XX, June 03–05, 2018, Woodstock, NY

[52] Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu, Yibo Zhu, Xuanzhe Liu, Xin
Jin, and Hao Zhang. 2024. DistServe: Disaggregating Prefill and Decoding for
Goodput-optimized Large Language Model Serving. Proceedings of 18th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, 2024, Santa Clara
(2024).
[53] Hao Zhou, Chengming Hu, Ye Yuan, Yufei Cui, Yili Jin, Can Chen, Haolun
Wu, Dun Yuan, Li Jiang, Di Wu, Xue Liu, Charlie Zhang, Xianbin Wang, and
Jiangchuan Liu. 2024. Large Language Model (LLM) for Telecommunications:
A Comprehensive Survey on Principles, Key Techniques, and Opportunities.
arXiv:2405.10825 [eess.SY]
[54] Yuchen Zhuang, Yue Yu, Kuan Wang, Haotian Sun, and Chao Zhang. 2023.
ToolQA: A Dataset for LLM Question Answering with External Tools. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems.

Ion Stoica, and Hao Zhang. 2024. LMSYS-Chat-1M: A Large-Scale Real-World
LLM Conversation Dataset. arXiv:2309.11998 [cs.CL]
[49] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff Huang,
Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez,
Clark Barrett, and Ying Sheng. 2024. SGLang: Efficient Execution of Structured
Language Model Programs. arXiv:2312.07104 [cs.AI]
[50] Li Zhong and Zilong Wang. 2024. Can LLM Replace Stack Overflow? A Study on
Robustness and Reliability of Large Language Model Code Generation. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 38 (2024).
[51] Ruizhe Zhong, Xingbo Du, Shixiong Kai, Zhentao Tang, Siyuan Xu, Hui-Ling
Zhen, Jianye Hao, Qiang Xu, Mingxuan Yuan, and Junchi Yan. 2023. LLM4EDA:
Emerging Progress in Large Language Models for Electronic Design Automation.
arXiv:2401.12224 [cs.AR]

13

